The paper “Investment Performance Evaluation of the United States Equity Thematic and Sector Mutual Funds’ Portfolios” has two-fold set goals. The scientific goal of the research is to decompose, analyze and interpret the investment performance of hypothetical portfolios composed of mutual funds with defined universes of stocks, based on officially designated investment strategies. The social goal of the research is to present an adequate methodology for investment performance evaluation, which would be the basis for setting regulatory standards, but also provide value for a wide range of internal and external stakeholders. The applied research methodology included two groups of models for investment performance attribution, namely factor as well as asset-based models. Within the first-mentioned group, the following were used: capital asset valuation model, three-factor Fama-French model, Carhart model, and five-factor Fama-French model. Within the latter group, Brinson-Hood-Beebower and Brinson-Fachler models were used, as well as geometric models. The research, which deals with thematic mutual funds, included 240 individual funds in the United States. Mutual funds were analyzed at the individual level and portfolio level based on the 2x2 matrix of market capitalization and investment style. Each of the analyzed portfolios is composed of 60 investment funds of a given investment theme. Using factor- based models, the factors that prevailed in the market were discovered. Also, the use of asset-based models confirmed the results of factor models for the dominant investment style. For all observed factors, it was possible to determine the impact on the portfolios of mutual funds and individual mutual funds. The influences of factors that are in line with the expectations of the initial original models are market premium, company size, momentum, as well as company profitability. The influences of factors that are not in line with the expectations of the initial original models are investment style and conservatism of the company's investment. The results of investment performance attribution also indicated the heterogeneity of excess returns, observed by sector. There is also the presence of momentum in the realized excess returns by sectors. These results suggest that certain aspects of the investment philosophy have been reflected in investment strategies that are not purely the result of passive tracking of the sector based on the realization of exposure. Based on the portfolio annual rebalancing, it was possible to significantly improve returns in the cases when the presence of a dominant market investment style was predicted. This is supported by the results based on exposure to thematic mutual funds and the annual effects of sector allocation in the research related to sector mutual funds. By analyzing the realized exposure according to the observed factors, as well as by analyzing the portfolio structure itself, it was possible to determine the occurrence of possible inconsistencies with the stated investment strategy. Based on the analysis of the research results, it was concluded that there is a high level of consistency at the portfolio and individual level based on the influence of factors from the applied models. The application of asset-based models, which use data about the structure of the portfolio and the benchmark, has made it possible to obtain results that can be more useful as they can be better aligned with the investment decision-making process. The complementarity of the application of factor models with asset-based models made it possible to confirm certain current trends in the market but also provided insight into aspects that were not possible using factor models alone. The shortcomings of arithmetic models for investment performance attribution based on multiple periods have been overcome by applying geometric models. This resulted in the successful linking of multi-period returns by applying geometric attribution models, without residuals. Consequently, this ensures consistency of attribution effects throughout different presented periods. 