The  number  of mobile  phone  users  is  increasing  day  by  day.  Analyzing  the  history  of  mobile devices, we can conclude that the manufacturers of mobile devices developed new very  sophisticated devices that can rightfully be called smart phones. Due to their increased capacity  and number of facts that affect our daily lives, we become more and more dependent on modern  mobile phones. Smart phones are used in different ways for telephone conversation, Internet search,  use  of  various  services  (SMS,  MMS,  e-mail),  use  of  cameras  or  GPS  devices.  With  the  development  of  mobile  technology,  there  are  also  the  first  security  problems,  which  affect  the  communication channel, ie, data transfer from the sender to the recipient. Security threats to these  devices are becoming larger, because there is still a lack of adequate security mechanisms and tools  for protection. With the use of operating systems for mobile phones this problem became more  complicated. Each operating system brings with it a large number of benefits to users, but also a  number  of  security  vulnerabilities.  Having  in  mind  that  the  Internet  via  mobile  devices  is  increasingly popular, there are risks related to the safe communication and the stage of establishing  a communication channel. Due to the increasing massive use of mobile devices, it is necessary to  consider the questions of security of mobile communication of any participant in communication.  Open source projects offer to the developers a whole range for developing their own solutions that  are based on their ideas. Possibility of access to the source code of an operating system made an  operating system that has surpassed all other systems and become a market leader in the world of  mobile phones. Андроид operating system, has quickly gained popularity among developers, and  even beyond, because it relies on the Java programming language. Андроид appears as an open  platform for mobile devices, which enables modification even at the level of the operating system.  For this reason, developers have the opportunity to develop a kernel-based security mechanisms  that  are  not  usual  for  other  mobile  platforms.  Андроид  operating  system  is  based  on  Linux  operating  system  and  belongs  to  an  Open  Source  Association.  During  seven  years  since  it  was  invented, until the moment this paper was written,  Андроид operating system advanced to 7.0.  version.  In  this  paper,  an  analysis  of  the  Андроид  security  mechanisms  was  made,  certain  deficiencies  were  identified  which  are  manifested  in  the  low  level  security  framework  that  surrounds the system. Results of the survey conducted indicate inadequate level of user knowledge  in the area of safety in the use of mobile phones on the Internet. Based on a detailed analysis of the  Андроид operating system, as well as its security mechanisms, there are certain results that suggest  the need for raising the level of the security framework of Андроид. The measures were proposed  for improvement, ie, for raising the level of security using SE Linux. The comparison was made  and  the  differences  between  the  AOSP  (Андроид  Open  Source  Project)  and  the  submitted  SE  Андроид (Security Enhanced) system are shown. At the end of this paper, the conclusion is given  with the directions of the future work.  