The research subject of this dissertation is the analysis of profitability, identification of basic determinants of profitability and the impact of these determinants on the profitability of agricultural enterprises in the Republic of Serbia. From the theoretical point of view, the specifics of agriculture and agricultural production, the importance of agriculture for economic development and the role and importance of agricultural enterprises for agricultural development are explained. The differences between the traditional and modern approach to measuring the company performance are explained, and the basic standards of these two approaches are given and theoretically explained. Both theoretical and empirical research was conducted in the dissertation. The theoretical analysis of the research subject is supported by the research results by domestic and foreign authors, while the empirical analysis was performed on the basis of regular financial reports on the operations of agricultural enterprises as well as various reports on the movement of individual macroeconomic variables. The sample consists of 151 agricultural enterprises engaged in primary agricultural production, and the research covered the period from 2014 to 2018. Statistical analysis of the profitability of these enterprises has shown that the observed agricultural enterprises operated successfully in general, making a profit during the entire observed period. The analysis of profitability from the aspect of different indicators have shown that enterprises differ from each other with regard to their success, but that these differences are also present from the time aspect. In addition to determining the level of profitability and differences that exist in the level of profitability among individual agricultural enterprises, one of the main objectives of this dissertation was to identify the reasons (factors) due to which some enterprises are profitable and others are not. In the process of identifying statistically significant determinants of profitability, determinants used in most research to measure the impact on the profitability of enterprises were applied. In this regard, the following internal determinants of profitability that the company has an impact on are used: company size, liquidity, indebtedness, sales growth and assets materiality. Furthermore, the influence of the following external determinants on profitability, which cannot be influenced by the company, is considered: gross domestic product and inflation. In response to a number of questions arising from this objective, the technique of econometric panel model was used, because in this way the data are observed from both temporal and spatial aspects, which provides a wealth of information, efficiency of evaluated indicators and objectivity of conclusions. Before drawing conclusions about the influence of individual determinants on profitability, it was proved that all variables used in this study are stationary, that there is no high correlation between them, i.e. that there is no problem of multicollinearity but also that there is no problem of heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation in the regression model. Furthermore, in accordance with the performed statistical tests and the presented statistical significance of these tests, it was concluded that the regression model with a fixed effect is the most adequate. Finally, it was found that the size of the company, as an indicator of profitability, has a positive and statistically significant impact on the rate of return on assets, while liquidity, indebtedness, gross domestic product and inflation have a negative and statistically significant impact on profitability. The remaining two factors, sales growth and assets materiality, do not have a statistically significant effect on the rate of return on assets (profitability). The results of this empirical research will provide the management of the analyzed enterprises and other users with ways to make future business decisions more easily.  