Dynamic business conditions are the key determinant of modern retail. The increase in demand, and consequently the increase in revenue, assumes the company's readiness to respond accurately and rapidly to all market challenges in the market if it wants to continue growing business. A new, accelerated retail model implies that there is no problem of lack of inventory because the delay in delivery results in lost sales, customer dissatisfaction, and consequently a decrease in the competitive advantage. The main goal of the present paper was to map the impact of forecasting demand on the inventory management process, as well as defining a general methodology for forecasting demand and inventory management. It is precisely in this context that the systematization of the scientific and theoretical description of all or almost all determinants of inventory management has been carried out. Comprehensive analysis of the significance of multi-criteria demand management for the stock-management process profiles key determinants for the research of the efficiency of the process of forecasting demand. The main research goal was to identify the key specifics of demand in modern business conditions, and then demonstrate the efficient application of the forecasting methodology as an important stock management segment. The business of a company that is not based on the demand prediction process, as a stock management factor, is not sustainable for a long time. The research was based on data from the retail store of Winwin Shop Čačak, which included forecasting the demand for 4 product categories in over 100 retail stores, which account for over 40% of the total sales. Based on the conducted research, the results of the analysis showed that the process of forecasting demand is of vital importance for increasing the efficiency of retail operations in modern business conditions. The multi-criteria method, the Analytical hierarchical process, represents the mathemati cal basis of the conducted research, while its software support, the Expert Choice software solution, was in the function of estimating and forecasting the future demand of the products that were the subject of the analysis. The results obtained only confirm that the process of forecasting demand is of great importance for optimizing inventories, that is, increasing the efficiency in the company's operations. However, the impact of subjectivity on the demand prediction process can be minimized, but not completely excluded. 