A literature review found that there were several points of view regarding the concept of performance. The common denominator of most approaches is that the performance of the behavior or actions relevant to the achievement of organizational goals that can be measured. Performance indicators are essential management tool for company management which assist in directing management toward the most useful long-­‐‑term strategies, as well as in the effective short-­‐‑term decision-­‐‑making. Based on current and past performance, financial indicators are used in order to anticipate the future business operations. Financial indicators represent inseparable entirety with performance indicators other business functions. Performance management is an umbrella management mechanism of higher order that integrates other systems and creates the basis for an adequate managerial decision-­‐‑making. The research topic of this thesis is to analyze the possible interconnectivity of financial performance and business performance of the organization. The success of the organization is determined by one of the generally accepted approach. Based on the secondary sources review and empirical research conducted over the most successful companies in the period of five years, the basic hypothesis that there is a correlation between business success and indicators of financial performance has been confirmed. The results show that values for most of successful companies’ financial performance indicators have clear accumulation at certain intervals. Statistical analysis of the data showed a clear interdependence between certain indicators of financial performance and age, as well as the industry of the company. As a result, empirical research has found that there is a statistically significant difference between the values of certain indicators of financial performance in more successful and less successful organizations. Built on the analysis of data that resulted from the research, a new theoretically established management concept based on indicators of financial performance has been defined.