The main subject of interest of this doctoral thesis is development of new methodological framework and empirical implementation of internal credit rating model for medium and large companies in Serbia. The main goal is credit risk quantification of Serbian companies by employing newly developed credit scoring model, as well as, the assessment of credit quality of companies by utilizing developed internal credit rating model. The data, which has been used as the basis of this research, is given in form of seven years history of financial statements, in form of balance sheet and income statement, of Serbian companies for the periods from 2006., up to 2012. year. The utilization of this data enables to quantify probability of default of Serbian companies by taking into consideration specific properties of this market and business environment. Based on new and the originally established methodology by the author this doctoral dissertation covers three large areas. The first is represented by the analysis of large number of financial ratios, as well as, a search for the most predictive financial ratio in the Republic of Serbia, based on available data history. Corresponding data transformation of financial ratios has been utilized with a purpose of credit scoring model development. As main result, the new credit-scoring model that quantifies the default probability, has been developed and proposed. This new model has a greater predictive power compared to models, such as Altman Z-score model, which have been developed and used on the foreign markets. As the final result, the internal credit rating model has been proposed and established by applying original approach, which shapes and uses the results gathered from previously developed credit scoring model. The final models and its results have been governed through the validation process which has been proposed by relevant academic literature and new Basel Capital Accord standards. The credit risk weights based on Basel II and III principles have been calculated and it has been demonstrated that all results presented in this research have confirmed the starting hypothesis of this doctoral dissertation.