Market positioning represents a concept based on active participation in the forming of tourist offers or services providing tourism companies with an opportunity to take an optimal market position. The first positioning approach, which originated in the 1970s, involved promotional activities of a single company, and the primary challange for marketing professionals was the issue of occupying the unique place in the minds of the consumers by investing marketing efforts. Although, in the meantime, many authors viewed and defined the positioning concept from various perspectives, universal market coordinates, which could guarantee the provision of optimal, stable and sustainable market position, have not been established. Keeping up with the evolution of the positioning concept, themeans of achieving positioning goals have changed ranging from mutidimentional scaling to discriminant, factor and Conjoint analysis. This dissertation proposes a new approach to solving market positioning problems based on mutual application of statistical models and operational research models, which will enable marketing managers to timely react and formulate market positioning strategiesin the competitive environment. The suggested model opens up a possibility for anticipating the potential moves on the competition part, stiking the right balance between the focus on consumer preferences and the focus on the competition, which can result in the better formulation of the optimal market strategy. Conjoint analysis is used for assessing the consumer preferences, because it provides an insight into the market heterogeneity as well as the possibility for determining the optimal features of the tourist product. In case of heteregenous preferences, it is possible to implement tourist market segmentation by using the cluster analysis. However, taking into account the fact that the modern market is practically impossible to be conceived of without the 'competitive struggle', it is necessary to include all the aspects of possible market interactions. Such a market conflict, which is allegedly chaotic, hides the rationalities which are modelled on the application of games theory concepts. The final result of the mutual application of these three models (Conjoint analysis, cluster analysis and games theory) gives the possibility for determining the optimal market position, in a better way than in the cases suggested so far, which primarily used these models separately. The application and validity of this original market positioning model is demonstrated by testing it in the real life example of gastonomy events. The significance of the suggested model especially lies in its adaptibility, flexibility and the possibility for dynamic decision-making, since due to market condition changes, which can include the new product launching, the improvement of the existing product or the change of the consumer preferences, it is possible to be used again resulting in the optimal market position. In the future, this model can show the possibility of broad implementation, both in all the sectors of tourism and services sector as well, where it can represent the general paradigm for determining the optimal market position.