Managerial control is considered to be one of the key tools for management, implementation of corporate strategy and business improvement of one company. The efficiency of the control largely depends on the information provided to decision makers – information on past achievements and projections of a future position and earnings of an organization. Measuring past and projecting future achievements are fields studied within the systems for business performance measurement. Therefore, development of a new or implementation of an existing system for business performance measurement is the important basis for a successful decision making process For the purposes of fulfilling the managerial information requirements, managerial accountants and experts from the myriad of other managerial areas have strived to create principles, concepts, techniques and procedures for the development of the business performance measurement systems. Besides the conceptual and procedural issues, current surveys also address the problems of the development of specific business performance measurement systems. In spite of more than a decade long tradition in elaboration of these issues, development and use of the business performance measurement systems is still the phase of infancy. Therefore, the academy as well as the practice of management consider them as a hot topic, and create a vivid debate on the optimal system for business performance measurement. The aim of this doctoral thesis is to construct a new system for business performance measurement. Particular aim relates to determination of factors affecting the construction of the system – number of performance measures which iv Miloš Milosavljević (2015). Integralni sistem upravljačkog računovodstva za merenje poslovnih performansi, doktorska disertacija. Beograd: Fakultet organizacionih nauka are supposed to be included in the system, and the way in which the system is supposed to be used. A fundamental theory which defines the scope of this dissertation is the theory of contingency in management accounting. Hence, the study identified a set of factors that determine the diversity and use of the performance measurement system. Afterward, the influence of the performance measurement systems on organizational (financial and nonfinancial) success was examined. The primary data from the empirical study were used to validate the theoretical model. To the best of author’s knowledge, the study of this kind has never been conducted in Serbia before. Outside Serbia, only partial test of a contingency factor influence on the business performance systems was conducted, but never such comprehensively and in a form delivered in this doctoral thesis. The results indicate that Serbian companies use relatively wide range of performance measures. The factors defined in the theoretical model affect both diversity and use of performance measurement systems. Nonetheless, their importance significantly varies. Also, the balanced use of financial and nonfinancial performance indicators significantly affects business success. These results could be useful to other researchers in the field of performance measurement, management control and management accounting. Moreover, the results are very useful for practitioners – consultants and managers – in constructing performance measurement systems in specific companies.