The amount of digital multimedia devices in a modern day household capable of connecting to the internet has dramatically increased over the last years, including mobile devices such as smart phones and tablets as well as digital TV sets and set-top boxes. Since these devices are readily available and allow customization through software, development of distributed applications is greatly simplified. Applications developed in an integrated environment can offer users novel human-computer interaction scenarios compared to the scenarios that a single device could offer. By investigating existing systems in the field of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) that combine digital TV and mobile devices in a living room environment it was observed that existing systems have ad-hoc implementations with limited flexibility and lack the ability to explore different combinations of HCI scenarios. This dissertation presents the SHARP development framework allowing efficient implementation of distributed systems in an integrated environment consisting of digital TV, mobile devices and internet. The purpose of the framework is to assist researchers in the field of HCI to create innovative applications that would offer different combinations of HCI scenarios in the living room with less effort. At the start of the dissertation the results of a survey providing an overview of existing HCI systems targeting a living room environment are presented. Common characteristics of these systems are extracted and a list of the following HCI scenarios that applications, developed for an integrated environment, can offer are identified: sharing content on multiple screens (private content showing on the mobile device screen and public content showing on the central screen), using the mobile device to control actions on the central screen, motion detection using sensors, supplemental sensory feedback (haptic feedback, background lighting), combining passive viewing of television with parallel interaction, enriching the user experience with access to various information services (such as DVB, social media and metadata databases), combining interaction between co-located and non-co-located people. After identifying the scenarios a proposal for the SHARP development framework is outlined along with details on its design and implementation. The design of the SHARP framework allows developers to create applications that combine the identified scenarios. As the target domain to verify the benefits of the framework the field of game development was chosen. Game applications have proven to be in demand and profitable. Five different games were developed using the SHARP framework to show the flexibility of the framework and to demonstrate novel applications that offer new combinations of scenarios to the users. Conclusions on how the users accepted the identified scenarios were made by examining the experience of 59 test users interacting with the developed game applications. The SHARP framework was verified by comparing size, complexity and responsiveness of the applications developed using the framework and without using the framework. The results show that the framework reduced both development and testing effort by moving complex logic required in a game implementation to re-usable components within the framework. The responsiveness measurements collected from the applications developed with and without the framework show that although the usage of the framework introduced an overhead causing a slightly larger response time, the response times for all versions were well within acceptable performance limits.