The choice of the routing strategy in a packet network has the great impact on the
reliability and the overall quality of data transmission. The chosen routing strategy also
has an impact on the usage of different network resources, and bad routing decisions can
cause bottlenecks in the network, and limit the throughput. Additionally, network latency
as well as network cost also depend on the chosen routing scheme. In order to determine
the best routing strategy for the given network and expected traffic, routing optimization
is performed. The goal of routing optimization is achieving the best possible value for the
chosen network performance metric. Depending on the problem that is being solved,
optimization can be performed to maximize the network throughput, minimize the
network cost, minimize the latency, etc.
In this paper, we will address the problems of network throughput maximization,
and network cost minimization. We will focus on the non-blocking networks, which
guarantee the service to all users that are generating and receiving the traffic within the
defined boundaries, regardless of the current traffic distribution in the network. In this
paper, we will propose the novel routing scheme, based on load balancing and shortest
path routing. We will refer to the proposed scheme as load balanced routing (LBR). The
proposed routing protocol can be optimized using linear programming, in order to
minimize the cost, or maximize the network throughput.
The proposed routing scheme can easily be deployed in practice. Namely, shortest
path routing is widely used, and the proposed routing is a modification that can relatively
easy be implemented. The dimension of the linear program is acceptable, as well as the
time needed to perform the optimization. With the proposed routing, it is possible to
guarantee the service to the greater number of users, then in case of the regular shortest
path routing. Also, the cost of servicing a given number of users is smaller if the proposed
routing is applied instead of the shortest path routing.
First, we will introduce the proposed load balanced routing, and the linear program
for its optimization. Then, we will analyze the performance of the proposed routing
scheme, and compare it with the performance of the shortest path routing. In particular,
we will focus on two cases. In the first one, we will optimize the load balanced routing to
achieve the maximum network throughput. It will be shown that the proposed load
balanced routing can significantly increase the guaranteed network throughput, when
compared to the regular shortest path routing. In the second case, we will optimize the
load balanced routing in order to achieve minimum cost of the network that can support
given user demands. It will be shown that the cost of the network with load balanced
routing is lower than the cost of the network using shortest path routing.
Analysis will be performed for both regular and realistic network topologies. Also,
the analysis will be performed for the networks in which service reliability is demanded,
in the case of single resource (link or router) failure. It will be shown that the performance
of the proposed load balanced routing is better than the performance of shortest path
routing in all of these cases.