Data warehouse is a basis for the implementation of business intelligence systems, data integration and decision support. Usually, a dimensional model is built for data warehouse in order to get better data visualization. Data warehouse architecture represents definitions of basic data warehouse elements and describes the connection and structure of the elements. There are two dominant approaches in data warehouse architecture. First one is known as CIF (Corporate Information Factory) architecture and it is represented by Bill Inmon who believes that data warehouse needs to be normalized and needs to contain atomic data in third normal form. Second approach, known as BUS architecture, is represented by Ralph Kimball who believes that warehouse should also have multi-dimensional structure. Data Vault concept of data warehouse which was designed by Daniel Linstedt and represents detail oriented, historically followed and uniquely connected group of normalized tables which support one or more functional areas of a business. That is a hybrid approach which covers the best features from third normal form (3NF) and star scheme. Data Vault concept emphasizes the need to leave a trace from where and when data was sent into database, and also enables easy changes in data warehouse structure in accordance with business environment changes. Data warehouses are built in different methodological approaches. However, there is a problem with the fact that the process of data warehouse design and related dimensional model is not automatized. In this dissertation a problem of data warehouse design process was accessed, based on broad analysis of literature, and a possibility of automation of physical data warehouse design based on Data Vault concept, with a minimal interaction with users, researched. The work presents simple algorithm for automation of data warehouse physical design, based on Data Vault concept, using data model with metadata transactional data sources and rules. Algorithm for direct access to physical design of data warehouse formalizes, generalizes and largely automates the process of physical design for data warehouses based on physical model of structured, semi-structured and simple non-structured data sources. Relational model is a common factor both for Data Vault implementation and for original data and that is why all types are abstracted with meta-model. The direct approach means that Physical Data Vault - PDV is directly realized based on physical data source model in relational form. Conceptualization of metadata is presented with physical data model which, with small changes, can be used in design of individual data warehouses and represents basic methodological contribution of the work. Besides that, this work gives overall integrated approach to automation of data warehouse design because the approach enables design of data marts and of related ETL processes (from a source to data warehouse and from a data warehouse to data marts). In this way integration of all activities needed for realization for entire data warehouse is obtained. Based on results of the research in dissertation, a prototype of the application is made for support of physical design of data warehouse. Experiments with the algorithm, using a prototype of the design automation application, on a real case in the field of healthcare insurance, produced satisfactory results.