Application of biometric technologies in our contemporary human society is getting more frequent, so we can almost state that biometric technologies are part of our everyday life. When implementing biometric authentication, each system has specific requirements and constraints, which depend on the actual scenario in which the system is being used. In order to choose the adequate biometric modality, and also a fitting algorithm for the chosen modality, it is necessary to perform an evaluation of the biometric system performance. However, this evaluation is not always easy to conduct. This fact is true for both the unimodal and multimodal biometric systems. Even when open biometrics databases are available for evaluation, it is necessary to adapt system to work with testing protocol of the chosen open database. Moreover, if the biometric system uses multiple biometric modalities, evaluation gets even more complicated because of different available fusion algorithms. In order to overcome these difficulties, as there is not a detailed model of multimodal biometric systems available in relevant literature, this thesis presents a unified multimodal biometric systems evaluation model. Presented model is based on MDA (Model Driven Architecture) paradigm. A part of the unified multimodal biometric systems evaluation model is the metamodel of multimodal biometric system evaluation, which represents an ontology of terms used in this domain. Based on unified multimodal biometric systems evaluation model, a prototype framework for multimodal biometrics systems evaluation has been created. By using proposed framework it is possible to evaluate performance of multimodal biometric system in different use cases. Experimental evaluation results based on used database and algorithms show that the use of framework shortens time necessary for evaluation to a quarter of previously required time. Also, a new analytical method for biometric system threshold optimization, based on the predefined desired system behavior was developed. As final, a learning tool based on some of the framework functionalities is used to show how the use of framework can make the process of educating engineers in the field of biometrics more efficient.