Essentially, this doctoral dissertation, beside introduction and general conclusions with recommendations for further research, encompasses three separate, but utterly interrelated and intertwined parts, each of which provides its own conclusion. The first part (chapters 2 to 5) includes definitions of quality indicators, human capital and social capital, as well as analysis of their relations. The ideation of human capital serves to express values of our human capacities. Although there have been many efforts to standardize definition and establish categories of human capital, it seems none of them succeeded in creating global consensus on human capital model which would be used for all the necessary measurements and calculations. This problem affects all major areas, including science. Also, it became obvious that nowadays any examination of human capital seems to be literally meaningless without harnessing concept of social capital, beacuse overlapping of the two is impossible to avoid. While human capital comprises knowledge, skills and competences, experience, intellect, talents, know-how, expertise etc. possessed by an individual, social capital is even less tangible, as it inheres in the structure of the relationships among individuals. It might be understood as the only form of capital that grows only when shared, stemming from the family relations, friendships, professional and other ties. Finally, quality indicators are the qualitative and/or quantitative information on an examined phenomenon, which makes it possible to analyze its evolution and to check whether quality targets are met, establish directions, and make appropriate decisions and actions. Along with indicating performances of a process, they also may be useful for identifying areas that require deeper studies and investigations: They track changes over time, thus highlighting potential quality concerns, being related with some particular stakeholder or an interested party. Therefore, in order to link quality indicators with the critical success factors, one should always base them around needs and expectations of the main stakeholders and interested parties. The second part aims to introduce and clarify concepts with growing potential for influencing on the approaches to human and social capital management in times to come. It challenges conventional views on management issues by allowing theories from other domains (virtual, technical, history, nature) to migrate to the field of social complexity and provide a new paradigm, based on the complexity theory which provides vivid metaphors for understanding both the nature of the world and human sense making: the worldview. This approach goes beyond pure linearity and has socially responsible nature: in the long run, it contributes to the sustainable development, while at the organizational level this model might serve as an umbrella VII for strategic alignment of employees’ behavior. In this light, throughout this part the novel solutions are provided for different governance and management systems (environmental, HR, marketing, social responsibility etc.) outside their frontal actions to conclude how policy makers may use this paradigm shift to achieve stronger stakeholder engagement, especially in science, education, and overall knowledge production. This process enabled convenient conditions for emergence of the quality indicators for human and social capital of the scientific community. The third part starts with the description of how the quality indicators model for this research was developed. For this process to succeed, it was necessary to discover utterly novel data sources, since the use of new indicators with obsolete data format shall not bring a new breakthrough: The new data should inform policy makers on changes regarding understandings, behaviors, beliefs and attitudes. This also required a move from aggregated, macro statistics to smaller details, adjusted to the circumstances of the scientific community. The research methodology (model implementation) included data collection in two directions: The questionnaire were sent to the scientists of Serbian origin both in Homeland and Diaspora, which was followed by the analysis of their CVs, and wider search of their data in all publicly available sources (from Google to social networks profiles). The research sample encapsulated 444 PhDs (202 in Homeland and 242 in Diaspora) and it enabled all three basic hypotheses to be proved. Among the most significant findings are the facts that Serbian PhDs in Diaspora, compared with those in the Homeland, publish over 4 times more papers, around 6 times more papers in journals with IF, are cited above 15 times more, in 14 times more documents, have 13 times higher value of overall IF, over 5 times higher ResearchGate score and around 5.5 times higher value of the h-index. In doing so, they are more inclined to use a strategy of more co-authors - on the average, they have 4 times more coauthors than PhDs in the Homeland. Also, the study has shown that Serbian scientific Diaspora have advantage in the ways they perceive work in science and research, the position and role of management for it, lifelong learning in context of international mobility, and languages they speak. Along with that, Serbian PhDs throughout the world are also more of the opinion that people's consciousness evolves faster than ever before, due to the impact of science and technology. On the other hand, members of the scientific community in the Homeland, according to this sample, are characterized by a higher devotion to the interests of the wider community they identify with, including greater respect for traditions and heritage. PhDs in Serbia, compared with those in its Diaspora, consider the "succession planning" as a more important factor in their work, are more willing to take into account the experiences of their ancestors when make vital decisions, and generally feel more afraid of the possibility that current trends of our civilization - especially regarding the level of consumption, and despite all capacities of science we have developed, may lead the entire humanity towards some form of collapse. VIII