The topic of this work is to point out the importance of behavioral approach in decision making processes in contemporary finance. Behavioral finance is a relatively new scientific discipline which deals with the influence of emotional, cognitive and social factors in financial decision making processes. Behavioral finance is an interdisciplinary study based on psychology and applied in the field of contemporary finance. The objective is to emphasize the necessity of practical application of behavioral finance which, supported by psychology, explains how decision makers make their choices. It also observes behaviour in business decision making, linking classical finance and reality as well as the ways financial actors use in decision making with all personal feelings and limitations innate to humans. Behavioral theory neither excludes emotions from human behaviour nor underestimates strong influence of emotions on decisin makin processes in contemporary finance. Behavioral finance provide a better understanding of investors' behaviour, managers and events in complex and uncertain business environment taking place on financial markets. In order to analyze if and how much the concepts of behavioral finance are present in Serbia and Montenegro, a survey and three focus group interwievs with financial managers have been carried out. The focus groups objectives were to construct the value orientation scale of financial managers apllied later in the survey in order to understand how much the concepts of behavioral finance are present in the practice of our financial institutions. Twenty three managers from Montenegro participated in three groups discussing the following issues: manager performances, decision making, value system and behavioral finance. As a result of these moderated discussions a seven-point grading scale of manager value orientations has been formulated. It consists of 15 values and is dependant on two factors: result oriented values and moral values. iv The survey research has been carried out in order to determine what decision making styles financial managers predominantly use as well as to examine the role of emotional competence and value orientations in decision styles formation. On the basis of the results obtained by researching and through focus groups, it can be concluded that managers are not quite aware enough of the concepts of the behavioral finance theory and that knowledge these theories offer are not used in practice. Although there is consensus about importance that personality traits have for success in this business, professional employment selection hardly exists. When it exists, these traits are not checked. The results show that managers usually rely on the rational decision making style, which is not in accordance with behavioral finance theory and its assertion that humans are not always rational in making decisions. Of course, we must bear in mind that in our environment it is believed that there is no room for emotions and it is advisable to rely on rational reasoning – an idea abandoned long ago in economically developed countries. Nevertheless, the results of this research show that forming rational, intuitive and evading style of decision making is dependent on emotional competence and values, which at some extent corroborates behavioral finance theory which points out that, apart from information, personality traits, value system, previous experience, emotions, attitudes, motivation, and other factors influence decision making as well.