Traditionally, it was believed that the role of business organizations in the world is the creation of profit. In the last few decades this belief was brought under a question mark. Namely, some of the or- ganizations that were producing big profits have went bankrupt. The question that emerges is: „What is necessary for organizations to be sustainable?” The researches that investigated this question in the previous period have suggested a few models that could assist in the achievement of a sustainable business strategy. The aim of this doctoral dissertation was definition of a new model for sustainability of an organization using multi-criteria decision-making models that would serve as help in strategical decision-making. The research was carried out in several phases. The first phase consisted of litera- ture search for information about indicators relevant for strategical decision-making. Next step was researching of indicators used in Annual reports of sustainability for world top rated companies. By choosing 150 indicators, sorted in strategical perspectives modeled on Balanced scorecard, the re- search was performed with the participation of the people that make strategical decisions. Acquired results were analyzed using PCA and Varimax rotation to determine the existence of correlations and any group formation among the tested indicators. It was determined that there are eight perspectives that could describe 69.38% of the entire sample. Based on the obtained results, the indicators that best describe those perspectives were chosen. In the next phase, fuzzy DEMATEL methodology was used in order to calculate the cause and effect relationship between the chosen indicators. The results demonstrate that the realization of a sustainable strategy of an organization depends on eight perspec- tives in which the learning perspective, best presented by indicator The Exchange of Organizational Knowledge, carries the most weight. Leadership perspective is the second by importance and is fol- lowed by perspectives sustainability, process, socially responsible business, growth/market, clients and finances, respectively. The application of the established model should increase the chance for sustain- ability of an organization in the future.