: Numerous studies conducted in the last twenty years have shown that in spite of quality models implementation, nonconformities and errors in health care organizations are still present, therefore low quality of those organizations and services they produce is still present, too. These implemented quality models differ among themselves, although they are based on the same guideline, i.e. standard, regulation or concept, so results of implemented models differ as well. The cause of diversity in the structure of implemented quality models and diversity in model results could be found in process of translating guideline into the implemented model for quality assurance or improvement in health care organization, while neglecting processes of health care organization that are not clinical processes, but still responsible for quality of health care organizations and services they produce. Information on the quality of various physician or health care organizations, as well as on the outcomes of different methods of treatment or diagnosis that are necessary for the patients’ appropriation for a particular health care organization, physician, or method of treatment and diagnosis are unavailable, insufficient or not in a suitable form for making the right decision. There is few information available to patients on the quality or outcome of different treatments or different providers or specialists. Health care quality reports are designed primarily to support payers' choice of health plans and quality improvement among plans and providers, not patient awareness and choice. For this reason health care organizations with higher level of quality cannot be awarded with more frequent patients’ appropriation for their services, and patients are not provided with understandable information which would allow them to make a choice based on the factors important to them. All previously exposed indicate the existence of two basic groups of problems in achieving quality in health care organizations and in gaining benefits of quality achievement. The first group of problems is arising from transformation of general standards, guidelines and regulations into a concrete model for specific health care organization which generally omits none-health care processes. The second group of problems occurs due reporting the achieved quality while excessive amounts of data on parameters prevents patients to simply make decisions about choice of health care organization and variety of types of data makes more complicated comparison between health care organizations. Viewing the organization of health care as a business system through the prism of Anatomical Structure Model developed at Faculty of Organizational Science, provides identification of all elements that affect, directly or indirectly, the quality of health care services and structuring the health care organization. The result of this viewing process is a Model for Quality Improvement of Health Care Business Systems that serves as a link between, on the one side certain policies, standards, guidelines or concepts, and on the other side concrete model for quality assurance, control and management of health care organizations. Model for Quality Improvement of Health Care Business Systems includes a graphical, verbal and mathematical part which allows the calculation of the quality of each constituent element of the health care business system and thus allows quality comparison between health care business systems that are using this model and, or their component elements of the same species. The model was applied in two health business systems of primary health care level and results of that implementation showed that the model influence the quality improvement of health care business system.