Knowledge-based economies are highly dependent on adoption and application of knowledge for improving their competitiveness. In such environment, huge amounts of relevant knowledge are located within and outside organizations. Increasingly dinamic global market forces organizations to use their knowledge flows for their needs, in order to achieve competitive advantage. Organizations strive towards continuous knowledge accumulation so they can improve their business solutions and products, create new market opportunities, strengthen their knowledge base and predict future of the market. These terms increase the importance of the absorptive capacity concept, which relates to acquiring, assimilation, transformation and application of knowledge by organization. Although there are many studies which deal with the division of absorptive capacity into constituents and analyze their characteristics, this research is examines the relations between absorptive capacity dimensions and components, as well as the intensity of their influence on the absorptive capacity level of organizations from technology and knowledge intensive industries. For that purpose, the absorptive capacity management model which monitors knowledge flow from the acquiring to the application of knowledge has been designed and applied. The model is based on the division of the absorptive capacity into dimensions and components. The results of the application of the absorptive capacity evaluation model were analyzed in order to explore the possibility to assess the influence of the absorptive capacity on the competitive strength of an organization, which represents the main hypothesis of this doctoral dissertation. For the purpose of the research, quantitative and qualitative methodologies based on a survey were applied. The received data were analyzed with the absorptive capacity evaluation model, by the application of the discriminant analysis as a statistical method. The results of the research show that it is possible to analyze the absorptive capacity level by the indicators in the model, and that the available relevant knowledge represents the most influential determinant of the absorptive capacity. The influence of the absorptive capacity on the competitiveness of organizations was determined with the application of the foundations of the Balanced Scorecard model. Based on the results from the research, it can be concluded that it is possible to manage the absorptive capacity determinants in the given framework. The results of this research will contribute to better understanding of the absorptive capacity framework in sectors which are characterized by strong reliance on knowledge adoption and utilization for further development, which is of great importance for the development of competitiveness of knowledge-based economies, including the Republic of Serbia, by its strategic orientation. The designed model can provide management support in the areas of organizational learning and knowledge and innovation management.