Accessing pixels in memory is a well-known performance bottleneck of SIMD
(Single-Instruction Multiple-Data) processors for image and video processing. This
thesis proposes a new solution of a parallel on-chip memory subsystem, including
new functionalities and an enabling architecture, which enables a higher processing
throughput and consumes less energy per processed pixel than the other state-of-
the-art subsystems.
The thesis first presents new functionalities of a parallel memory subsystem, i.e.
new block and row access modes, which are better adjusted to the needs of image
and video processing algorithms than the functionalities of existing parallel mem-
ory subsystems. The new access modes significantly reduce the number of on-chip
memory read and write accesses, and thereby accelerate the imaging/video kernels
that are in focus of this work: sub-pixel block-matching motion estimation, pixel in-
terpolation for motion compensation, and spatial window-based filtering. The main
idea of the new access modes is to exploit spatial overlaps of blocks/rows accessed in
the memory subsystem, which are known at the subsystem design-time, and merge
multiple accesses into a single one by accessing somewhat more pixels at a time than
with other parallel memories. To avoid the need for a wider, and therefore more
costly SIMD datapath, this work proposes new memory read operations that split
all pixels accessed at a time into multiple SIMD-wide blocks/rows, in a convenient
way for further processing. In addition to a higher processing throughput, the new
access modes reduce the energy consumed by the parallel memory subsystem for the
same amount of processed pixels, by reducing the number of repeated accesses of
the same pixels.
Second, as a proof of concept and for the completness of the proposed solution,
the thesis describes a parametric, scalable, and cost-efficient architecture that sup-
ports the new access modes, as well as access modes of existing parallel memory
subsystems. The architecture is based on: 1) a previously proposed set of memory
banks with multiple pixels per addressable word of a bank, 2) a previously proposed
shifted scheme for arranging pixels in the banks that enables parallel access to all
pixels of a block/row, and 3) control logic that implements the shifted scheme in the
memory banks and the access modes, and thus provides a convenient and efficient
programming interface.
The advantages of the proposed solution of a parallel memory subsystem are an-
alytically and experimentally demonstrated on a case study of well-known 3DRS
sub-pixel block-matching motion estimation algorithm, commonly used for real-
time frame-rate conversion during video playback. The implemented block-matcher,
basedontheproposedparallelmemorysubsystem,isabletoprocess3840∗2160video
at the rate of 60 frames per second, while clocked at 600 MHz. Compared to the
block-matcher implementations based on the six state-of-the-art subsystems and the
same SIMD datapath, this work enables 40 – 70% higher throughput, consumes 17 –
44% less energy, and has similar silicon area and off-chip memory bandwidth costs.
That is 1.8 – 2.9 times more efficient than the prior state-of-the-art, calculated as
the ratio between the achieved processing throughput and the product of all costs:
energy consumption, silicon area, and off-chip memory bandwidth. Such a high
efficiency is the result of the new access modes and the cost-effective architecture,
which reduced the number of on-chip memory accesses by 1.6 – 2.1 times.
Thanks to its proven efficiency, the proposed parallel memory subsystem is used
inthemostrecentandmostadvancedIntelprocessorsandsystems-on-chipforimag-
ing and video processing on mobile devices. Furthermore, it is being continuously
improved for use in future generations of Intel processors.