Gamma scintillation cameras (GSC) are medical devices for the analysis of the distribution intravenously injected, inhaled or ingested radiopharmaceuticals. The development of integrated circuit technology had influence on construction of GSC’s head and on flexibility, speed, cost and expandability of GSC’s supported systems for image acquisition, storage and analysis. Although the era of digital GSCs began long ago (1980s), many nuclear medical centres still have analogue or semi-analogue GSCs with fully operational mechanics and scintillation crystals, which are the core of nuclear imaging. Optimal solution is digitizing GSC and integration with modern computer systems. Digitizing of analogue and semi-analogue GSCs ensures: 1) continuity of using old GSCs and the postponement of buying new instrumentation; 2) application of best available analysis of nuclear-medical studies (in accordance with the principles of Evidence Based Medicine, EBM); 3) testing and development of new analysis techniques to improve the treatment of patients, if the system architecture is “openedž. The aim of the research presented in this doctoral thesis is the development of a computer system (GammaKey system) that gives the functionality (acquisition, storage and image processing) to semi-analogue GSCs, compatible and also can be used with modern digital systems, has an open architecture enabling the development and clinical application of new diagnostic techniques. GammaKey system meets the following requirements: 1) simple replacement of the original computer system (e.g. MicroDELTA, Siemens Gammasonics Inc., Ilinois, USA) to the new configuration – a simple connection to GSC and minimal training thanks to the intuitive Windows graphical interface; 2) reliability – meets the quality standards of nuclear medical instrumentation defined by National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA), no loss of information about patients and studies, accurate and precise production of results; 3) compatibility with other (non)medical systems by using standard data formats (JPEG, BITMAP, ASCII, DICOM) and data synchronization between two workstations viii (the first one for acquisition, storage and processing, the second one only for image processing); 4) fast, simple and cheap upgrade to new generations of computers and analog-to-digital convertors (ADC) – enabled by using LabVIEW software environment (National Instruments, Teksas, SAD) and commercial National Instruments ADC; 5) development and implementing novel non-standard acquisition protocols and tools for study processing. Basic configuration of GammaKey system includes: 1) standard functions for image processing (resampling to the matrix 1024x1024 pixels by bilinear interpolation, nine-point smoothing, Butterworth and Winer filter); 2) tools for image manipulation (zoom, contrast adjustment, deleting parts of the image that are not of interest); 3) standard functions for scintigraphic study processing (up to 10 regions of interest (ROI), calculating time-activity-curves (TAC), frame and TAC arithmetic opearations, N-point median and cubic spline TAC filtering, automatic ROI segmentation of static studies, ROI radioactivity correction). Advanced configuration of GammaKey system includes three non-standard features: 1) EffSpleen acquisition and analysis for efficacy of the splenectomy prediction in patients with chronic immune thrombocytopenic purpura; 2) Submarine analysis for localization of parathyroid tumors; 3) SalivaryScan analysis for complete quantitative investigation of salivary glands function. EffSpleen routine enables complete acquisition and analysis of in vivo examination of platelet kinetics in order to estimate splenectomy efficacy according to the method developed in the Center for Nuclear Medicine, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade. Developed routine allows the automation of time- consuming processing of sequential static studies and calculation of platelet sequestration index. Submarine routine is the implementation of the original method for the localization of parathyroid tumors based on dynamic parathyroid scintigrams, developed in collaboration with physicians from the National Cancer Research Center of Serbia, Belgrade. Evaluation of Submarine method is presented in the group of patients with histopathologically proven parathyroid tumors and its efficacy has been demonstrated for localization of hyperplasia and parathyroid lesions covered by thyroid nodules, solving typical pitfalls of standard subtraction protocol. Algorithms for visualization and automatic extraction of regions with parathyroid lesions are suggested. SalivaryScan routine enables automatic calculation of 11 quantitative indices that ix describe the function of salivary glands, unlike commercial software that usually gives only one parameter (ejection fraction). A significant modification of secretion velocity index is introduced. Developed tool is a basic instrument for further multidisciplinary research in the field of salivary scintigraphy. An example of nephrology clinical study based on studies acquired by the realized system is also presented, where the analysis is done in a third-party application developed by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). GammaKey system enables the continuity of basic clinical practice, as well as following modern trends, continuity in research, defining valid reference values and the possibility of validation of other applications. All these facts describe the system that fully supports EBM concept. GammaKey system has been used in daily clinical practice in two leading medical centers in Serbia: Clinical Center of Vojvodina in Novi Sad (since 2005, Center for Clinical Laboratory Medicine, Nuclear Medical Department, http://www.kcv.rs) and Clinical Center of Serbia in Belgrade (since 2007, Center for Nuclear Medicine, Neurology, Urology and Endocrinology Departments, http://www.kcs.ac.rs). The EffSpleen protocol has been used in the Clinical Center of Serbia (Nuclear Haematology Department) since 2008 (more than 250 patients). The Submarine routine has been used in the National Cancer Research Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, for diagnostic and research purposes since 2012 (more than 100 patients, including retroactive analysis since 2008.). More than 30 000 patients have been examined using the GammaKey system (more than 10 000 patients at the Clinical Center of Vojvodina and more than 20 000 patients at the Clinical Center of Serbia).