User-generated content on Web forums is added much more often than it is deleted or
changed, so its targeting during incremental crawling differs from the Web site pages crawling.
Adding new content to a forum can result in moving existing content to new or existing pages.
Incremental forum crawling is not a trivial task, because ignoring in which way the content is
presented, distributed and sorted can lead to the transfer of posts that have already been indexed in
the previous crawl cycles. On the other hand, there is a wide spectrum of forum technologies that
allow different navigational paths to its latest posts, as well as different ways of presenting and sorting
user generated content.
This thesis presents Structure-driven Incremental Forum crawler (SInFo) that specializes in
targeting the latest content in incremental forum crawling using advanced optimization techniques
and machine learning. The main goal of the presented system is to avoid already indexed content in
new crawling cycles regardless of its technology. In order to achieve this, the following Web Forum
features have been used: (1) the sort method on the index and thread pages and (2) the available
navigation paths between the pages that the current Web Forum technology offers. Since the date of
content creation plays an important role in determining the type of sort, their detection and
normalization is not a trivial task. Machine learning models were used for this task, because the
generated dates can be in different formats and in different languages. On the other hand, the detection
of navigational paths is achieved by interpreting the URL format and scanning the pages they target.
It has been shown that using the proposed methods and techniques while targeting pages with
the latest content can achieve a minimum number of duplicate content downloads and maximize the
utilization of the navigational structure and paths of the current forum technology. The experiments
were performed on a wide range of already existing popular forum technologies as well as on
individual stand-alone forum technologies. SInFo has demonstrated high precision and a minimum
number of duplicate content transfers in each new crawl cycle. Most of the duplicates that the
proposed system encountered are from pages that had to be visited in order to correctly determine the
navigational path or to find the appropriate URL. Additionally, machine learning models, although
complex, achieved good performance while crawling and have high accuracy in date detection and
normalization, reaching an F1-measure of 99%.