Business intelligence, as an important cornerstone for the process of decision making, is necessary for successful operations and management of any organization, and its main capabilities include: information extraction, warehousing and analysis of a huge amount of data. Recent research in the field of Business Intelligence has indicated that valuable information can be extracted from non-structured data, which allows more accurate decision-making on all management levels. The ability of an organization to create a ubiquitous environment of all their data extractors and decision points is critical for the success of the Smart Grid concept. Smart Grid technologies are bringing innovations in electrical power industries, affecting all parts of the electricity supply chain, and leading to changes in the market structure and business models. Business intelligence and performance management infrastructures are widely recognized as a necessity for extensive energy systems adopting the Smart Grid technologies. A business intelligence model for B2B e-business of the transmission system and electricity market operator, presented in this dissertation, is specifically designed for electricity market activity monitoring through the necessary information and data flows. Development of a Business intelligence solution, specifically tailored for electricity power systems, requires a structured and well defined methodology as well as an architecture that defines the basic elements of a data warehouse. The main goal of the methodology for the design of a business intelligence system proposed in this dissertation was to explore how Kimball’s approach for modeling a business intelligence system can be used as a cornerstone for the implementation of new data warehouse objects, which have only minor reliance on predefined objects within the SAP environment. To achieve this goal a „bottom-up“ approach was used, and in addition a modified dimension life-cycle adapted for Accelerated SAP for Business Warehouse methodology was presented. The methodology presented in this dissertation was applied in practice resulting in the business intelligence system for electricity market activity monitoring. The proposed solution was assessed in the Public Enterprise „Elektromreža Srbije”. The results show that business intelligence solutions can contribute to a more effective market management in a data-rich environment and can be successfully used for reporting in the various business segments of the organization. Beside, results of comparative analysis offer pointers and proposals for combined methodologies that can be used for the development of robust business intelligence systems.