Development of new products and services can revitalize existing and create completely new industries. Therefore, development and commercialization of new technologies is of great importance for global economy. In this field, entrepreneurship is described as a driver of economic and social development, through creation of new companies, ideas, products, and services. In the last few years, the field of social entrepreneurship has become a subject of interest of many researchers and practitioners who are aware of significance that development of entrepreneurship has not only on creation of work and new job opportunities, but also on creation of a healthy environment in a society as a whole. The process of technological entrepreneurship starts with estimating the market value of new discoveries and technologies and matches them with existing or potential market needs, with the purpose of transforming market opportunity into commercialized product, service or new venture. In this process, people who organize themselves into teams for development of technological new ventures have a significant role. Both in theory and in practice, this form of organization is known as “technological startup” or only “startup”, and it is defined as temporary organization that has been created in order to find sustainable and scalable business model. Startups also include new ventures at an early operational stage that are created in fields of innovations and newest technologies and their main characteristics comprise high dynamism, orientation towards growth, profit, and creation of new market values. A significant number of entrepreneurs who develop new and technologically based products and services within their own startups dispose extensive technological viii knowledge and skills. Due to the focus on technology and development of new products or services, founders of technological ventures focus less attention on business orientation which is very often one of the main reasons for failure. The subject of research and analysis of this dissertation is marketing and marketing orientation as a part of business orientation in a development process of technological entrepreneurial ventures. The aim of this dissertation is to create a comprehensive model of the impact of marketing orientation on the success of technological entrepreneurial ventures in the startup phase of development. Concept of marketing orientation is defined as an organizational culture, which in an efficient way creates behavior in organization, and at the same time creates superior value for customers that is considered as a precondition for a successful business. The impact of marketing orientation on the development process of technological startups has been analyzed in dissertation through competition orientation, customer orientation and interfunctional coordination. Apart from marketing orientation, the subject of analysis is concept of entrepreneurial marketing, which was analyzed through components of entrepreneurial orientation: innovativeness, proactiveness, risk-taking, autonomy, and competitive aggressiveness. In this dissertation, analysis and research included environmental impact, level of competitiveness, as well as mentorship role in the process of development of technological startups. Additionally, personal characteristics of successful entrepreneurs were analyzed. Measuring performances of technological startups, unlike already established companies with business history and big corporations, differs from traditional means of measuring success, and it presents a great challenge for both theory and practice. Relying on the review of existing scientific literature and based on the qualitative research conducted within specific target audience, 13 goals of development of technological startups have been identified. In quantitative research, with reduction of this scale’s dimensions by using the method of main components, four factors of success of the development process have been generated: success of idea and concept, success of value proposition, success of value exchange, and success of business model. ix The results of quantitative research which was conducted and presented in this dissertation indicate important role and impact of several marketing and entrepreneurial orientation components of technological startups on success of its development process. Furthermore, results explain the impact of environment competitiveness, as well as mentorship on success of its development process. Personal characteristics of successful founders of technological startups have been identified within the last part of the research.