This dissertation proposal explores the support for operational production planning in small and medium-sized enterprises (SME). Special emphasis is put on scheduling activities that represent the most complex planning problem at the operational level. SMEs are the predominant category of enterprises both in Serbia and in the European Union (EU-28). SMEs also present the most frequent type of enterprises in the manufacturing sector in Serbia and the EU-28 countries. Make-to- Order (MTO) production and production organization according to the process are the most common forms of production in small and medium-sized manufacturing enterprises, and the Job Shop scheduling problem is an integral part of operational, i.e. short-term production planning in this group of enterprises. Bearing in mind that operational production planning is directly and closely related to the transformation of raw materials and semi-manufactured goods, which creates and adds value, we emphasize the need to manage manufacturing resources adequately in the production process (materials, machines, tools, labour force, time, money - i.e. capital, information, market). The dissertation proposal presents the overview of basic theoretical concepts: small and medium-sized enterprises, support for SMEs, the process of management in SMEs, production planning, and resource management. Additionally, the process of operational production planning is defined from the aspect of activities it encompasses. Production scheduling problems are observed as one of the most frequent issues in the field of operational production planning. They include scheduling products to machines, i.e. finding the sequence of tasks and activities that need to be performed on each of available machines. Also, it includes determination of time slots for the beginning and completion of certain manufacturing activities. The aim of an adequate schedule, i.e. sequence of operations, arises from the capacity constraints of production resources (workers, machines and other production equipment). Therefore, special attention is dedicated to the improvement of scheduling activities, to make adequate operational planning process which is harmonised with the needs of a particular enterprise. VIII For operational production planning activities, typical problems that occur are presented (scheduling problem, work in process and inventory between operations problem, and a problem of determination of operational period length), as well as models, methods and, techniques used for solving these problems. As some of the problems are classified as NP-hard (Nondeterministic Polynomial) problems of operational research, finding the best solution, i.e. optimal schedule, is a very complex problem. Therefore, in the literature, particular attention is dedicated to the heuristic approach for solving these problems. In the literature review, based on quantitative and qualitative analyses of the scientific papers, the papers that are of interest to this topic are selected, and the scientific achievements in the observed field are recognised. Finally, using the critical review of the literature, the proposal of the new research project presented in this dissertation is justified. In order to examine the practical aspects of the studied problem, it is assumed that operational planning of production is not at the adequate level of development in Serbian SMEs. The results of the survey performed on a sample of 79 companies indicate a modest knowledge and application of modern methods and techniques of operations management in operational planning and resource management in the production process. Based on that, it could be concluded that SMEs need an adequate support in the field of operational planning and management of resources in the production process. In the dissertation, a model of support for operational production planning and resource management in SMEs is created, in a manner to consist of six phases: investigate the problem of SME in the domain of operational production planning and resource management, define the goal of support, define the support package, define indicators for monitoring the application of support, provide the support, and analyze indicators of the performance of the provided support. Within the new research project, the scheduling problem in small-scale production is defined, and is typical for single product production (i.e. one-of-a-kind production). In the literature, this problem is known as a Dual Resource Constrained Flexible Job Shop. The observed problem is modelled in the numerical computing environment and programming language MatLab (Matrix Laboratory). To solve the problem, multi- IX objective genetic algorithm metaheuristic is used, known as NSGA-II (Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm II) with criteria functions makespan (C ) and JIT. The max application of the metaheuristics, which significantly improved DRCFJS problem solving, is further on presented in the dissertation.