Privatization of state and socially owned enterprises is a prerequisite for a successful completion of the transition process in Central and Eastern Europe, including Serbia. The experience shows that there is a need for the restructuring of these enterprises prior to their privatization. In that respect, there are various restructuring activities and their objective is make companies improve their performance, efficiency and create value for their shareholders. Subject of this disertation is the restructuring methodology which is based on key value drivers. Definition of value, measuring value creation and value creation models are also presented. The objective is make the management understand how to create value through restructuring activities and decisions regarding operations, financing and investments. In that respect, in order to create value, management needs to pursue strategies that raise the return on invested capital, reduce the risk, or are a combination of the two. The success of the restructuring effort is measured by the level of created value, i.e. the difference between the value of equity before and after the restructuring activities. The value of equity of a company equals the present value of its discounted future cash flows and depends on both the value of future cash flows and the weighted average cost of capital. In that respect, in order to increase the equity value, it is necessary to increase cash flows – through the increase in revenues, decrease in costs and increase in the asset turnover as well as to decrease the risk of doing business and, consequently, the cost of capital. Definition of the appropriate method of sale of equity contributes to the realized price of equity of the companies that are subject to the restructuring activities when their equity is offered for sale to strategic and financial investors. In that respect, one of the topics in this paper relates to the analysis of public tenders and public auctions as method of sale of equity of socially and state owned enterprises which are in the process of being restructured and privatized. Through the reseach findings and analyses presented, this disertation confirms a hypothesis that restructuring of the companies is the process through which their value can be increased and they can prepare for the sale to potential investors. Based on the presented restructuring methodology, this disertation also confirms that it is feasible to construct a restructuing model that is based on key value drivers and can be implemented in any company. Finally, based on the analysis of the privatization results in Serbia, this paper confirms that the model of sale of socially and state owned enterprises is the most efficient model of privatization in the late stage of the transition process.