The aim of this doctorial dissertation is to develop hybrid models that will allow improving the process for multi-criteria decision making. Existing tools that can support the multi-criteria decision-making have proven to be reliable and efficient. However, by the analysis it was observed that their main disadvantage is that they do not pay enough attention to the mutual comparison, conditionality and logical dependencies between the decision making attributes. Therefore, multi-criteria models are proposed in the thesis for solving decision problems that are based on a combination of classical and fuzzy methods of multi-criteria analysis, as well as the application of the interpolate Boolean algebra. The main hypothesis in the thesis is that by combining interpolate Boolean approach, fuzzy logic and multi-criteria analysis method the decision-making process can be better modeled than by using a single method of multi-criteria analysis. Classical methods of multi-criteria analysis in the literature are most often applied to solve the problem of decision-making, although their main limitation is the lack of adequate framework for the presentation of the uncertain/imprecise attributes. Such conditions are favorable for the development of the theory of fuzzy sets, which enables analysis of uncertain attributes with the help of fuzzy numbers. Therefore, in this doctorial dissertation were developed hybrid models that combine classical and fuzzy methods of the multi-criteria analysis, in order to overcome the identified deficiencies and achieve more reliable results. Also, the models are proposed based on the interpolate Boolean algebra involving logical interactions of attributes. In this way the capabilities are extended of the linguistic statements of decision makers, and a more realistic view of the problem is allowed. The proposed models are tested on the examples of ranking business banks and telecommunications equipment suppliers. To solve the problem of selecting the business banks is proposed an integrated model that combines classical and fuzzy method of multi-criteria analysis. On the other hand, for solving the problem of ranking suppliers is proposed an integrated model that combines a two-stage multi-criteria analysis method and a hybrid model that includes an analysis of the logical interaction between the attributes using the Boolean algebra in compliance with all the Boolean laws. The results achieved in the framework of the research showed that by the combination of multi-criteria analysis method one can overcome the shortcomings of classical and surpass the results of individual multi-criteria methods. On the other hand, by the application of the interpolate Boolean algebra it was enabled modeling of the interactions and interdependence between the attributes, and thus it is significantly easier to the decision makers to clearly present the actual decision making problem. The key contribution of doctoral dissertation is to improve decision-making system, by the development of combined muli-criteria models, in situations where the decision making attributes cannot be accurately determined if among them there are certain conditionalities and logical interactions. The main motivation for this paper is primarily its practical application in the real business systems.