The subject of the research conducted in this doctoral dissertation are the possibilities of improving operational performance of non-repetitive manufacturing systems – namely lead time and delivery reliability – through lean implementation. Examples of operational performance improvement through lean implementation are numerous, and most of them come from repetitive manufacturing systems, where lean was devised. Contemporary research shows evidence of an existing interest in implementing lean in non-repetitive manufacturing systems. However, the number of operational performance improvement cases in non-repetitive manufacturing systems is significantly lower than the number of cases coming from repetitive manufacturing systems. Out of several reasons causing this, one of the most significant ones is that the knowledge of lean implementation in non-repetitive manufacturing systems is not as structured and systematized as in repetitive manufacturing systems. In addition, there is no unique framework for implementing lean in non-repetitive manufacturing systems that would take all the characteristics of a specific manufacturing environment and all the characteristics of lean into account. The main goal of the research is to improve the knowledge in the field of lean manufacturing and to test the effects of lean implementation in non-repetitive manufacturing systems through the design of a new and original model of lean implementation in non-repetitive manufacturing systems. This will be based on the analysis of the previous experience, and through experimental validation of the designed model in a company that represents a typical non-repetitive manufacturer. The analysis and systematization of the previous research in the field of lean implementation in non-repetitive manufacturing systems shows that an interest in implementing lean in non-repetitive manufacturing systems does exist, but so do problems caused by the characteristics of non-repetitive manufacturing systems that do not allow for lean implementation practice in repetitive manufacturing systems to be simply copied in non-repetitive manufacturing systems. In order to test the possibilities for lean implementation in non-repetitive manufacturing systems, this doctoral dissertation reviews scientific literature for information on lean development, characteristics of non-repetitive manufacturing systems, possible implications of those characteristics on lean implementation, as well as the possibilities for solving problems in non-repetitive manufacturing systems through lean implementation. Lean was developed in Toyota, in a manufacturing system (that was) identified as repetitive. There are significant differences in characteristics of repetitive and non-repetitive manufacturing systems, mostly caused by diverse needs fulfilled by the two types of manufacturing systems, and consequently by different goals and activities undertaken to achieve those goals. The differences in characteristics can have significant implications on the ways lean is implemented in non-repetitive manufacturing systems. Lean implementation is most commonly harmonized with the characteristics of repetitive manufacturing systems, so it is necessary to design a tailor- made approach to suit the characteristics of a specific manufacturing environment. Based on the analysis of possibilities of lean implementation in non-repetitive manufacturing systems, an original lean implementation model for improving operational performance of non-repetitive manufacturing systems was designed. The model design followed two directions. The first direction was to develop a conceptual framework for implementing lean in non-repetitive manufacturing systems, where the main goal was to give new overview and interpretation of lean principles in the light of non-repetitive manufacturing systems characteristics, and to analyze the possibilities of using customized lean principles for actively shaping the non-repetitive manufacturing environment. The second direction stems from the first one, and represents the formalization of a model for lean implementation in non-repetitive manufacturing systems. The model itself operationalizes customized lean principles, and suggests a way of applying lean principles in non-repetitive manufacturing systems through a series of steps aimed at improving operational performance. In order to test the possibilities of improving lead time and delivery reliability in non- repetitive manufacturing systems through lean implementation, the model was implemented in a company that represents typical non-repetitive manufacturing system. The possibilities were first tested through simulation, where the results show that model implementation can improve lead time and delivery reliability. This was followed by an empirical validation through actual implementation of the model in the company. The empirical validation results show that the operational performance of non-repetitive manufacturing systems, namely lead time and delivery reliability, can be improved through lean implementation. The contribution of this doctoral dissertation is reflected in its several key results: (1) a new model of lean implementation, tailor-made to characteristics of non-repetitive manufacturing systems, was designed; (2) the possibilities of lean implementation model for improving operational performance of non-repetitive manufacturing systems were evaluated through simulation and empirical research; (3) the proposed model was assessed based on the evaluation of simulation and empirical research results; (4) the current state of lean related research was reviewed, with a special attention to lean implementation in non-repetitive manufacturing systems; (5) previous research in the field of lean implementation in non-repetitive manufacturing was critically assessed; (6) recommendations for future research were given.