Now more than ever, the pharmaceutical sector is today in a state of dynamic changes. It is a global trend, full of uncertainties and turbulences, where misjudgments and applied strategies are not rare. The new millennium brings new temptations and challenges onto the social, political and economic scene. A long way has been crossed, from traditional medicine production to the modern pharmaceutical industry. That path is characterized by major changes during the twentieth century, such as the emergence and rise of the large pharmaceutical companies during the fifties, thalidomide disaster of the sixties, new managerial strategies of the seventies, global integration and concentration of capital of the nineties and intensive development of biotechnology at the beginning of the twenty-first century. Dynamic factors in the last three decades are strongly pushing the pharmaceutical sector forward, not allowing stagnation and state of lethargy. Taking into account the circumstances and conditions in which the pharmaceutical industry carries out the activities in Serbia, the dynamics of development of the global industry and the fact that the areas of strategic management and management of changes in this sector have not been adequately implemented, the subject of this research is managing the strategic changes in the pharmaceutical industry, with special emphasis on pharmaceutical industry in Serbia.. The aim of this paper is the analysis of the pharmaceutical sector and its functioning, analysis of changes in the pharmaceutical sector, as well as establishing an adequate framework for the management of strategic changes in the pharmaceutical industry in Serbia. The paper defines a concept of strategic changes and presents the most important models of strategic change management. Special emphasis is on Kotter‟s model of change management, the model being one of the most important theoretical concepts in this field. Also, the basic elements and characteristics of healthcare and pharmaceutical industry are analyzed, both on a global level as well as and in Serbia. Understanding of the pharmaceutical industry requires knowledge an understanding of its key mechanisms and processes, first and foremost knowledge and understanding of the importance of research and development of pharmaceutical products, marketing and sales, but also knowledge and understanding of expenses and financial strategies of pharmaceutical companies. In addition to this analysis, special attention is given to trends and challenges in the global pharmaceutical industry that certainly have significant influence on the dynamics and direction of the development of the pharmaceutical industry in Serbia. The Healthcare and pharmaceutical market in Serbia do have specific characteristics and they are analyzed separately. European integration means also significant changes in this field which is one of the strategically most important fields in the country. The paper also gives special attention to the possibilities for further growth and development of this industry in Serbia. Also, empirical research will be implemented within this thesis as well as the demonstration of a need for a systematic approach and improvement of change management in the pharmaceutical industry in Serbia. Based on the results, the management model of strategic changes was initiated in the pharmaceutical industry in Serbia, which should serve as the improvement of company operations, as well as increasing the efficiency of the entire health sector in Serbia.