Information technologies (IT) are the drivers of modern society and business development. In today’s business environment, information technologies create changes in business systems and the ways organizations work. The growing application of skills, methods and techniques in project management has contributed to the improvement of management systems in organizations with the purpose of creating competitive advantages on the market. IT project management in organizations includes the process of IT and business strategy harmonization, with the aim of satisfying the needs of internal and external stakeholders. IT application and sophistication level depend on the organizational capacity and the approaches used in business strategy implementation process. A successful IT strategy development requires a framework for an effective and efficient technology implementation. Therefore, the employment of competency and capacity evaluation systems enables organizations to establish a quality base for value creation with the use of IT. Maturity models represent modern tools for organizational competency and capacity evaluation in project management. Both past research results and studies performed by the academic and the professional community indicate two directions in organizational maturity analysis. The application of general maturity assessment models on various project types has resulted in the disregard of competencies specific to a particular industry. Moreover, maturity models implemented in IT industry do not include the analysis of project and organizational competencies and capacities. The aim of this thesis is to create an integral model for organizational maturity assessment that will include both evaluation systems. With the purpose of creating an integral model for IT project management maturity assessment, primary data have been used, gained through quantitative and qualitative vi Dragan Bjelica (2017). Integrisani model za ocenu zrelosti u upravljanju IT projektima, doktorska disertacija. Univerzitet u Beogradu, Fakultet organizacionih nauka empirical research. The research has included organizations whose business strategy contains a well-defined IT component. The research process has included a 360 degree analysis and assessment of the organization from the perspectives of IT experts, project managers, directors, investors and end users. This is the first time this type of research has been conducted in the Republic of Serbia, while internationally there are only partial results for some general and specific aspects of the evaluation. The research results confirm the main hypothesis, i.e. that it is possible to create a model based on competencies, processes, documentation, management systems and metrics for IT project management. These components affect the delivered value, knowledge management, project performance and project management organisational system. Based on the proposed model, we have created referent measures for six maturity levels. These measures enable us to compare Serbian organizations according to their best-practice IT project management. In addition, the recommended model can be implemented modularly, depending on the organizational needs and the market demand. The integral model for IT project management maturity assessment proposed in this thesis can be beneficial to both academia and professional community. This is due to the fact that the proposed model can contribute to the improvement and the expansion of theoretical approaches and frameworks to maturity assessment, to the evaluation of organizational competencies and capacities in IT project management, as well as to the defining of the strategic direction of organizational development.