The subject of the doctoral dissertation research is the development of crowdsourcing models in smart cities based on the Internet of things (IoT) and mobile technologies. The central research problem considered in the thesis is the possibilities of applying crowdsourcing, the Internet of things, and mobile technologies for the development of smart city services. The focus of the research is on the analysis, definition, and implementation of different models of crowdsourcing to improve the quality of life in smart cities. The doctoral dissertation primarily examines the citizens’ readiness for the implementation of crowdsourcing services of a smart city. The main goal in the first phase of the research is the identification of those crowdsourcing services based on the Internet of things and mobile technologies that will encourage the participation of citizens. The research focus is on cities that are not yet fully aligned with smart city standards. The methodological approach of examining citizens’ readiness was based on an analysis of crowdsourcing models, such as crowd wisdom, crowdfunding, crowdvoting, and crowdsensing, and their application in various fields, such as traffic, environmental conservation, utility services, and health. The data was gathered in the city of Belgrade, for two years through a survey that included a sample of 210 citizens. The results indicate that citizens are ready to accept crowdsourcing services based on crowdfunding, crowdvoting, and crowd wisdom models. Furthermore, the results reveal that citizens are interested in environmental conservation (crowdfunding services that support solar energy development and environmental protection) and public transportation (crowdvoting and crowd wisdom services that can improve the state of the public transport). The obtained results, in addition to indicating the priority services that should be implemented, could also serve as a good basis for initiating the implementation of other smart city projects. The proposed methodological approach and conclusions could also serve as a part of a wider framework for the selection of implementation projects in other cities. The doctoral dissertation presents the development of the crowdsourcing Smart Belgrade platform, whose goal is to encourage citizens to work in teams and achieve common goals through the use of collective intelligence and an organized interactive online community. Citizens of the smart city can be informed about current problems in the field of ecology, utility services, and public transportation through the crowdsourcing platform. Registered users on the crowdsourcing platform can participate in solving defined problems, add new initiatives, post relevant information collected using appropriate mobile devices, and report problems in the city. In addition to the listed services, a crowdvoting service based on voting for initiatives has been implemented on the platform. The proposed model in this dissertation should contribute to better information and participation of citizens in a smart city. In the doctoral dissertation, the model evaluation was realized to test the system and measure the relevant parameters that affect the effectiveness and usefulness of the proposed model. The collected results confirm the main hypothesis that the development and usage of crowdsourcing models based on the Internet of things and mobile technologies improve citizen participation in the process of collecting, disseminating, and using the information in a smart city.