Lifelong education and constant training, represents one of the basic paradigms of progress of modern society, based on the technical-technological development and global business. Education and learning has become much faster, followed by IT evolution and technology progress, leading to new scientific knowledge and application, but also the development of new scientific fields. At the beginning of the XXI century, there was a new area of science, as a discipline of business intelligence, to discover the relations of the data in the field of education - Educational Data Mining, which deals with the development of methods for analyzing and determination of the legality of the data coming from the field of education and uses its methods to better understand the behavior of students and realization of teaching progress. The subject of the PhD thesis presents the possibility of applying business intelligence in education, in order to identify the key factors of student’s success in order to improve the higher education process. Determining the most important variables of a student from his/her origin and high school, success in the first year of undergraduate studies, through their influence and the correlation with the overall success of the studies, to the ability to accurately predict success at the end of the studies, using methods, techniques and tools of the business intelligence, is the central subject of dissertation. PhD thesis analyzes current research and knowledge in the field of data mining in education in detail, especially in the field of higher education, on the basis of which the need for proposing a new approach and method for predicting performance indicators of study in higher education institutions is perceived. Dissertation, also proposes original software solution– application for analysis, monitoring and forecasting the success of students at the undergraduate level, as part of an integrated portal for the exchange of knowledge and information between student and faculty. By applying the methods and techniques of the business intelligence, the implementation of the developed models to predict the success of the study was made, as well as the result verification of the data base of students of the Faculty of Organizational Sciences, University of Belgrade. PhD dissertation is structured in 12 chapters. Objectives, hypotheses, as well as the plan for the implementation of research and doctoral dissertations are being presented in the introductory chapter. Then the next two chapters provide the basic concepts of business intelligence and data mining, including the analysis and systematization of knowledge and extensive research literature on data mining in the field of higher education. The fourth chapter provides a basic outline of the projected research model, especially in terms of software support used for the implementation of research, as well as sources and data structures that are used. In the fifth chapter concepts of descriptive and comparative analysis are being applied, for a detailed definition of data structures, mutual dependencies and correlations within the data. From the sixth to the eighth chapter, the vii development of predictable model in RapidMiner, Clementine and Matlab software environment is introduced, by using the regression, decision trees, support vector machines, artificial neural networks and the ninth chapter provides a comparative analysis of prediction model performance that was previously developed, as well as the identification attributes on the influences of the study success. The basic structure and functionality of the information system for analysis and monitoring the performance of higher education is being presented in the tenth chapter. The eleventh chapter provides concluding remarks and summarizes the key results, as well as the basic guidelines for further development and improvement of predicative models, while the doctoral dissertation itself ends with the twelfth chapter, in which an overview of the bibliography is provided. PhD dissertation contains two documents as enclosures. The first enclosure provides a detailed specification of cases where the developed information system for analyzing and monitoring performance of studies is used. Functionalities and options of the developed information system are shown through a detailed presentation of the user interface, with synthetic and analytical analysis of data about the performance and success of the influential factors is presented in the second attachment. In the dissertation, a comprehensive research project in this area is presented with the application of methods and techniques of business intelligence in order to carry out analysis and to predict the success of students at the undergraduate level, which can also represent and support the effective management of higher education at the institutions to take decisions aimed at improving the implementation of the educational process. The developed models should help professors in the early identification of students with whom they can work, students who have the ambition of constant training and advanced education, but also students who need extra or additional training to improve and enhance their knowledge. The model may be useful to students, as well as an insight into predictable success in university based on existing habits of learning, working and evaluation, and would also benefit the companies that want to timely identify students as potential future apprentices or employees. The final result of the thesis is reflected in the recommendation of using 14 models that achieve greater accuracy of 90% for prediction of the average study grade, the average length of study or an assessment on professional courses on the fourth year of study, as well as the established factors and variables that are crucial for determining academic success. The research results will help to analyze the issue of further introduction of systems and models for predicting the success of students in higher educational institutions, as well as to determine the detailed requirements to be achieved by future students and how they can achieve more and be more successful. Also, the survey results can be used by other higher educational systems (eg. Master academic studies) with minimal upgrades and updates, all with the goal of promoting and improving the entire process of academic education. An integrated system for monitoring the success of students during undergraduate studies is developed, which can help higher education institutions to make informed decisions and direct training in optimal direction when creating the curriculum. Conducted research results in the thesis will help bring educational data mining closer to researchers in Serbia, as well viii as to begin the process of introducing systems and models for predicting the success of students in higher educational institutions.