The development of modern society is largely based on high-quality telecommunications networks. In this regard, it is of great importance to telecommunication networks have high availability which achieves high availability of services used by end users. Today, the backbone networks are usually implemented with a large number of nodes (several dozen) why there is a problem to directly calculate the availability of such networks, since the execution time of algorithms for exact calculation of availability increase exponentially with the number of nodes and links. Therefore, it is of great practical importance of the use of approximation algorithms during the design of such networks to help in the definition of initial conditions for the design of the network topology. The aim of this PhD thesis is the introduction of a new method for approximate calculation of the maximum availability of complex telecommunications networks. In order to obtain the maximum values of the availability, it was developed a method of network synthesis. Starting network topology for this new method is a chain. In determining the maximum network availability, the first step of the synthesis is to form the ring and then continue adding one-by-one links in the network topology so that it delivers a maximum increase of all-terminal availability. By adding one link at a time, where all links have the same availability, perform the synthesis of the network in which each step has a maximum availability for a given number of nodes, links, and the availability of links. The approximation functions of the maximum network availability for a given number of nodes, links and the availability of links are obtained by the analysis of the results of network synthesis method for the networks with maximum availability. Limits of the availability of the network (which depends of the network topology) can be calculated based on the approximation functions. In addition, based on the approximation functions can be defined the boundaries in which they need to move a number of links to be able to get the desired availability of appropriate choice of the network topology. It VII has been shown that for maximum availability of the network, all nodes should have the same connectivity, or differs by one at most. Starting from this rule and knowing predetermined limit on the number of links in the network, the network design process can be done in a few iterations to get to the network topology that ensures the requested availability. Running time, of approximation functions defined within this dissertation, does not depend on network size. This allows a large number of calculations which allows analysis of a large number of combinations of input parameters. It is shown that approximation functions, defined within the thesis, are more accurate than the functions that have been published in the literature. Calculated approximate values are compared with the exact values of availability and it is shown that the relative error of approximation is significantly less than 1% for the networks whose links have the availability greater than 0,75.