This thesis defines model of interoperable e-business statistical systems based on service oriented architecture and web services. Research is adapted for application in statistical system of the Republic of Serbia. Official statistics is one of the key elements in information system of each democratic society. This component provides data related to economical, demographical, social situation and state of the environment. The most important task for official statistics is to give real picture of social and economic movements in state. Further, it aims to provide reliable basis for analysis and decision making at different levels, from public government and other institutions to business entities and citizens. Official statistics in the Republic of Serbia works on principles defined in document of Economic-social council of UN - basic principles of official statistics, as well as in document of European commission – Practical codex of European statistics. Majority of countries have one or more statistical institutions on national level (NSI) that together constitute national statistical system of that country. Main tasks of such systems are: gathering, storing and analysis of statistical data, and providing the data to different groups of users. Within each of NSI, statistical production is performed through various production lines and processes for different statistical areas. Mostly, business architecture of NSIs are based on so called stove-pipe model. In this model, independent production line is formed for each statistical area within NSI. For each domain, full process of production from research planning to gathering and analysis of data that are necessary for publishing, is realized independently of other domains. Each domain posses its own data, sources and users. Electronic exchange of statistical data is very common way of communication among statistical services. The exchange is permanently followed by lack of interoperability and need for data conversion. This thesis proposes for adopting common standards for statistical data sharing and exchange. Main goal is to create set of standards that are broadly acceptable, so to enable quick and prompt access to data and metadata. Service-oriented architecture of statistical information system enables interoperability both on application level and business process level. Interoperability on semantic level is provided by designing common domain ontology and by developing common data model on domain ontology.