: This work gives definition of a methodological approach to build information system of telecommunication company based on models, through consolidation of general approaches of IS development and a specific initiative within telecommunication area:  MDA (Model Driven Architecture), an approach to software development that was set as a standard and promoted by OMG (Object Management Group).  EA (Enterprise Architecture), an approach to simultaneous development of Business and IT Architecture of a company. TOGAF (The Open Group Architectural Framework) is the most common and best known architecture framework and method for enterprise architecture development.  NGOSS (New Generation Operations Systems and Software), a program being developed by Telemanagement Forum that represents a framework for development and implementation of „Operation and Business Support Systems – OSS/BSS” within telecommunication industry.  SPL (Software Product Line), a development of IS over Software Product Lines, represents a modern approach to automation of domain-specific model-driven software development, where a software product family, and not a single software product, is developed through domain engineering. The methodological approach is based on a software product line specific to telecommunication domain which is based on NGOSS frameworks and models and which allows efficient building of Telecommunication Company IS through the following three distinct processes:  General domain engineering for telecommunication domain,  Domain engineering for telecommunication domain type of service,  Application engineering. In order to define a methodological framework for development of model-driven telecom operator IS it is necessary to have a good insight into the following dimensions of complexity in telecommunication domains: Functional Domains, Areas of Integrated Processes, Types of Telecommunication Services, IS Development Life-Cycles Phases, Specific Telecom Operators IS is being developed for. Afterwards, it is necessary to define both mutual relationships and dimension-shifting sequences. The basic initial scheme that gives classification of telecommunication domain by sub-domains and horizontal and vertical dependencies between sub-domains was defined based on eTOM and SID NGOSS Framework. The basic mechanism, named “Multi-level Staged Configuration”, was defined as technique which overcomes the complexity of telecommunication domain and works as a transition from one sub-domain to another. When such mechanism is applied to the basic initial classification scheme the result is a system for multi-level staged configuration of telecommunication domain. After that, it is possible to define a framework for telecommunication domain software product line that, through domain and application engineering, encompasses all previously mentioned dimensions of domain complexity. Due to multidimensional complexity of telecommunication domain, this approach implies specific domain engineering which consists of two levels: General domain engineering for telecommunication domain and Domain engineering for type of service. The General domain engineering for telecommunication domain; One of important steps of this domain process is defining system for Horizontal Multi-level Staged Configuration (HMLSC) HMLSC system is responsible for controlled and comprehensive definition of all initial Features Models by functional areas of telecommunication domain. The System is implemented through four HMLSC schemes. Within a functional area, models are horizontally dependent on each other and are constructed in accordance with defined dependencies between sub-domains. Besides Feature Models by functional areas, all necessary UML model patterns are also defined: Data Model Templates, Behavior Templates (applications and processes), etc. Another important step of General domain engineering for telecommunication domain is defining system for Vertical Multi-level Staged Configuration (VMLSC). This system is implemented through six configuration schemes. A main result of Vertical Multi-level Staged Configuration execution is implementation of vertical processes development through multi-level staged transformation of Feature Model, where the result (configuration) from the previous level represents input parameters for model construction on a lower level. The next important step is Defining system for Model Generation. Features Models represent well common and different features of product families. However, feature models do not serve their own purpose. They represent a guideline for construction of domain-specific data or behavior models. It means that feature models should be mapped into other models to transmit to them the necessary semantics. Mapping of MC into other models is performed through model generation schemes. Domain engineering for telecommunication domain type of service. In this section of Software Product Line (SPL) for telecommunication domain, the configuration schemes for Horizontal Multi-level Staged Configuration (HMLSC), defined in General Domain engineering, are further elaborated. These schemes normally represent rules and a path for defining models for type of service. Through use of these schemes, all initial Feature Models for IPTV service are defined by functional areas of telecommunication domain. In the second section, the schemes elaborated in General Domain Engineering for telecommunication domain that form the System for Vertical Multi-level Staged Configuration (VMLSC) are further elaborated. These schemes normally represent rules and a path for defining End-to-End Processes for type of service. Through use of these schemes, Feature Models are mutually annotated and a procedure of vertical processes development for IPTV service is defined. In the section of this domain process, are also defined schemes for automated configuration and generation of UML models of class diagrams and activity diagrams for IPTV service, based on UML model templates for IPTV and configurations of Feature Models. Application engineering for telecommunication domain allows specification and generation of a specific operator’s IS. Simultaneously, this part, as well as the entire methodological approach, is illustrated through step-wise tailoring and generation of a specific IS for a specific IPTV service operator. Configuration of a specific operator’s request for IS (Including IS) is performed first. After that, the IS is being tailored in detail using Vertical Multi-level Staged Configuration. During this process, generation of a specific telecom operator’s IS models is performed. Model-driven methodological approach to development of telecommunication company IS contributes to the solution of the following problems of IS development:  Solution of IT and Business Alignment, a problem that arises from differences in abstraction levels of Business and IT concepts.  Finding the way to overcome Multidimensional complexities of telecommunication domain.  Solution of the problem of IS development caused by Business Dynamism, because, besides being complex, Business is also highly dynamical due to constant and fast switches of technologies, user requests for new services, market competition, etc.  Allowing mass customization of services that remained unsolved by the existing methodological approaches, due to uncompleted solution of software reuse problem.  Supplements to general EA approaches and NGOSS domain EA with detailed models of telecommunication domain that are functional with specific telecom operators, through use of the existing ISs.  Allowing more efficient model transformation that represents one of the major general problems in MDA approach. This work closes with a review and a comparative overview of advantages and disadvantages of the existing approaches and methods used in the thesis and discuss the advantages brought by the approach the thesis sets forth. The automation of presented methodological approach brings more efficient IS development; especially bearing in mind the great potential of this approach for becoming the general methodology of IS development.