In section Introduction we define area of research and our main goals, we point out crucial hypothesis and method of research, we provide contents and description of dissertation with emphasising crucial aspects of our work. Second section is committed to the concept of efficiency and methods for evaluating and measuring efficiency. Principle of efficiency is one of the most important parts of contemporary business decision making (Savić, 2011). Efficiency should be defined as a capability to minimize the input means in order to achieve maximum results (Amado et al., 2011). With organizations which use one input to define one output, efficiency is measured as an output divided by input. However, real problem emerges when we have to measure efficiency of organizational systems which use many different types on inputs to create different outputs (Thanassoulis et al., 2012). Main idea of this research was to create novel statistical model of efficiency which can overcome problems with different types of input/output variables. Thus, it is necessary to integrate all indicators into one value. Issue at stake is how to overcome fact that variables are measured in different units, and how to provide appropriate weighting factors. As one of the frequently used methods, Data Envelopment Analysis – DEA will be explained. DEA method was developed by Charnes, Cooper & Rhodes (1978), in order to measure efficiency of organizational units, in particular a non-profit one. Creator of this method suggested a nonparametric approach for evaluating of efficiency. The approach was based on the idea that multiple inputs and outputs are integrated into one virtual input and output. Weighting issue was resolved by allowing each Decision Making Unit (DMU) to determine its own weights, all of this with idea for each of them to maximize its efficiency. Only constrain was that weights had to be a positive number, and that quotient of virtual outputs and virtual inputs cannot be larger than 1 (Martić, 1999). Besides DEA method for measuring efficiency, in dissertation Stochastic Frontier Analysis (SFA) was also elaborated. This is alternative approach towards measuring efficiency with the extended usage of econometrics models. In third chapter, attention is being shifted to the concept of multivariate data analysis. The term has to explain multivariate aspect of data analysis, in a way that many observations are collected on large number of variables. Multivariate data analysis provides us with the opportunity to analyze complex data sets, with many mutually dependent and independent variables occur. In third chapter dissertation is mostly focused on two crucial statistical methods: principal component analysis (PCA) & factor analysis, and cluster analysis. Factor analysis and PCA are most commonly used to identify relatively small number of factors which represent complex interrelations between all variables. These methods are very usefully in identifying hidden dimensions of observed phenomenon. Main difference between these two methods is the way of data examination. Factor analysis is mostly concern about covariance, while PCA is examining variances. Both of them have similar goals and procedures, thus factor analysis can be observed as a special case of PCA (Bulajić, 2002). Also, significant attention is committed to the cluster analysis as a multivariate data analysis method. It is frequently used for grouping objects, so the similar objects VIII create group which differs from the other groups. Objects are clustered on the issue of similarity which is defined in many different approaches. Basic idea of dissertation was to create a novel statistical efficiency model which will be based on the I-distance method. Therefore, the fourth chapter is focusing on the I-distance metrics in the n-dimensional space, which is proposed and defined by prof. dr Branislav Ivanović (Ivanović 1972, 1973, 1977; Ivanović & Fanchette, 1973). As one of the leading experts in the Statistical department of United Nations (UN) and its agencies such as UNCTAD and FAO (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development – UNCTAD; Food and Agriculture Agency - FAO), prof. Ivanović created this method with purpose to rang countries according to large number of variables. Many different socio-economic indicators were taken into account, and crucial issue was how to use all of them in creating one synthesized indicator which will therefore represent the rank. Proposed solution was based on the creation of the fictive entity, one with the minimum values for the each indicator/variable, and measuring the distance of other entities in observed data set from fictive entity. With the help of coefficient of partial correlation, rank list is formed. I-distance fulfils all the 13 conditions for being declared as a metrics. Crucial argument for the usage of I-distance method is its capability to integrate large number of different measures variables into one value. In dissertation, particular attention was focused on the applications of the I-distance method. Probably the most significant one was employment of I-distance method in the issue of ranking world best universities according to the Academic Ranking of World Universities – ARWU and SCImago methodologies (Scopus Journal Ranking). Precisely the improved I-distance method was emphasized as a major contribution to the issue, since it easily overcomes the problem concerning subjectively given weightings factor for variables/indicators. Besides these applications, in dissertation we have presented the issue of evaluating socio-economic development of countries, evaluation of health of nations, ranking of sport teams. All of these case studies are verified in leading scientific journals. The fifth chapter is based on the novel statistical efficiency model based on the I- distance method. In dissertation, this model is named Distance Based Analysis – DBA, and verified through many examples which are published in leading journals. DBA method was performed in the issue of university scientific output efficiency, banking sector efficiency, health sector efficiency and efficiency of regions in Serbia. Proposed method provided us with an interesting results and insights, which are later on checked with the DEA method. Dissertation significantly improved corpuses of methods for the issue of measuring efficiency. Also, in dissertation an important progress was made concerning the I-distance method, since the algorithm for the selection of first solution of the method and order of variables inclusion was significantly improved. Since the idea of I-distance method is to integrate many different measurement types variables into one value, it is essential that maximum amount of information is covered by the I-distance. In dissertation, we have showed that initial solution based on the sum of absolute correlations converges to the final solution fairly rapid. Suggested improved method provides us with the better results, since obtained solution incorporates maximum amount of input variables/indicators. The improvement of the method is reflected in the smaller number of steps needed for the final solution to appear. IX Finally, conclusion with the responses on each research issue and hypothesis was provided. Appropriate systematization of the scientific contributions, possibilities for further research is also elaborated. Extensive literature is provided and in Appendix results concerning I-distance method improvement experiment was provided.