Dissertation research problem relates to the large amount of data and lack of information in the reports for business reporting systems. Although rich with charts and tables, reports actually contain only data (their graphical representations) and little or no information. Report users need to manually interpret this data (reviewing various reports) and, as consequence, may fail to detect some important information because of: too much data, fatigue, lack of concentration, lack of knowledge or experience, because of subjectivity, or malice. This paper proposes automating the data-to-information transformation process. The proposed approach is based on the relation that states that data becomes information when meaning (interpretation) is added to it. Also, appropriate (domain) knowledge is required in order to obtain meaning from data. The proposed implementation of this approach involves applying expert system methods, techniques and technologies in order to automate key performance indicator interpretation. Specifically, declarative knowledge is to be presented by classes, and procedural knowledge with rules and fuzzy theory. The information can be derived by forward chaining and fuzzy inference, and it can be then converted into natural- language-like sentences by using canned text. After reviewing the current situation in the field of business intelligence systems and expert systems, the proposed approach is explained in detail from the theoretical point of view. It is then followed by a discussion focusing on the (potential) positive and negative aspects of the solution, and then by the implementation plan. By demonstrating the approach with a prototype - PT application (PT - Enterprise Profit Interpretation Tutor), testing and proving of the hypotheses was enabled. Reports that the application provides contain data (in the form of graphics and tables) but also information (in the form of natural-language-like sentences). The evaluation consisted of an evaluation study in which subjects were students who used PT as a teaching aid. The results show that students believe that PT is useful and relatively easy to use. Explanations in the reports are considered useful and easy to understand, but would need to be more comprehensive. The largest number of students surveyed believe that working with PT application to some extent contributes to increasing their knowledge and that it provides a faster and somewhat more interesting way to mastering profit interpretation. A comparative analysis of explanation facilities in modern tools for the development of expert systems and business rules is also presented in this paper. JEFF explanation facility, which was created in order for the prototype to work, is then presented and evaluated. The evaluation was twofold and was performed to assess whether objectives have been achieved and where JEFF stands when compared to similar tools. It was proved that almost all objectives have been achieved and that JEFF is almost as good as the professional tool it was compared with. When summarizing all results, it can be said that the hypotheses are proved (indeed, the proposed methods and techniques can be successfully used for the purpose of making information), but that the proposed approach was not tested in an enterprise environment. The prototype that was made proves that the approach is feasible to implement, but its effectiveness was evaluated only in terms of teaching aids for students, not as a tool to help managers interpret data. If the proposed approach was to be applied in practice, it would be necessary to create applications tailored to meet the needs of managers and that would actually function in an enterprise environment.