: The subject of this dissertation is development and application of the model of interoperable e-Business of payment systems based on ontologies and Resource-Event-Agent - REA (ISO/IEC 15944-4:2007) ontological object system structure. Referential models in the information exchange upon global business standards of financial industry are basis for this investigation. It will apply the experience and knowledge from the implementation of the Check Clearing and Direct Debit systems within the Association of Serbian Banks, created by the use of Enterprise Integration Patterns (EIP) and the standardized systems of messages. The investigation will be adjusted to the implementation of interoperable payment systems in Serbia. Various payment systems in the process of electronic transaction interact with various participants′ business systems. Participants’ business systems support a great number of users and business processes with specific requirements. In this, the basic problem is dissimilarity between business processes, data and IT technologies. From that reason, time, financial, and informatics resources are wasted on the data transfer from one to another system. Today, the exchange of financial transactions electronically became predominant. This calls for the development of models of interoperable e-Business of payment systems for the exchange of financial transactions and their processing. The standardization in the domain of payment system modeling, considered in this study should contribute to greater efficiency of other electronic business systems and to interoperability of participants’ electronic businesses. In every country payment system comprises a number of payment instruments, banking procedures, and the systems for the fund transfer between financial institutions. That alowws the circulation of money in the country. The Central Bank directly defines, regulates and directs the money flow, and fulfills the function of the regulator of financial flows through the control of the payment systems. The most important is Real Time Gross Settlement System - RTGS, which for the mentioned reasons, is mainly under the supervision of Central Bank. Banks′ systems and the systems of other financial institutions are connecting by RTGS System. Among them there are Doktorska disertacija: Мodel interoperabilnog elektronskog poslovanja platnih sistema zasnovanih na ontologijama institutions like clearing houses, payment agents, processing houses, and other. They are defined by law, deals with implementation, processing, information acquisition, or distribution regarding financial transactions, as well as other systems of electronic business. Payment systems, on the wyu described in this work, unify the elements, existent in every system based on messages, technological elements of supervising institutions, implicated by the standard message format, ambient conditions imposed by the place with the implemented payment system (in financial vertical, with kind of processing for which it is committed, geo-political typology, and other possible elements), required communicational interaction, information technologies necessary for realization of general and specific tasks. Being formal descriptions of objects, their characteristics and relationships in a particular domain, ontologies are explicitly understandable for man and computer. In this work, the ontological approach grants interoperability and consistency in model and enriches the design of the model from the domain of knowledge. Standard ISO 15944-4:2007, which will be considered in this study, defines ontological background for the specification of the concepts and relations included in the business transactions and scenarios known as Resource-Event-Agent – REA ontology.