Thanks to the unusual conditions with which the Serbian banking sector faced in the period 2008. to  2016, liquidity is no longer a category that means either the same easy to manage. This paper analyzes  the challenges imposed management structures to domestic commercial banks in the form of volatile  markets and their reaction in the management under conditions of no / liquidity as well as connections  to the defined FTP system. In the banking sector, such as Serbian, where there are no hedging instru- ments developed position of one of the questions was sure there was a strong correlation between the  FTP system and development of financial instruments, and develop the concept of management Asset  and Liability Management (ALM). Also analyzed period was imposed and the question of application  of a uniform model of FTP system in banks in terms of liquidity, to remember 2008. and 2016, signif- icant liquidity, as well as the implementation and implications of „best practices“ and new principles  known as Basel III.  Comparative analysis conducted two commercial banks operating in the Republic of Serbia in the  period of liquidity crisis of the banking sector at the end of 2008. The main findings indicate a high  sensitivity of bank systemic and specific factors, the limitations of liquid sources of financing, and  shallow domestic markets that the crisis significantly increased the cost of funding’s and deepened  maturity mismatch balance especially in the case of bank B. Example of Bank A indicates the same  high sensitivity systemic risks arising from the insolvency of the banking sector, as well as access to  short-term funds to overcome the liquidity crisis was not fully effective, bearing in mind that bank B  deepening maturity mismatches four years later.  The finding points to the Bank A and Bank B due to the illiquid interbank market, significant deposit  outflow sources, the increase in interest rates, low levels of liquidity coefficient regulatory, joined in  a bank instrument A by issuing shares and change ownership structure of the Bank, while the bank B  through borrowings with MM short-term horizon borrowed funds at prices „higher“ than the market  and postponed the problem of liquidity in the coming year.  The first hypothesis is that commercial banks apply modern concepts of liquidity risk management is  rejected after the empirical analysis of the banking sector. The main reason is that a number of com- mercial banks in this segment relies solely on regulatory requirements when it comes to liquidity risk.  The second hypothesis is rejected since it was found due that FTP system is sensitive to liquidity  conditions and the illiquidity of the banking sector.  The third hypothesis is accepted and it is through empirical analysis proves the existence of links and  ALM positions in commercial banks and that its responsibilities are in direct correlation with the FTP  system.