The  theme  of  Phd  thesis  covers  definition  and  interpretation  of  ethics  and  integrated  marketing  communications  through  ethics  application  in  different  marketing  spheres,  starting with advertising, marketing research, modeling marketing and promotional mix to  the communication with targeted pool, with a specific focus on children and youth.   Thanks to the communication methods and techniques findings show potential influence  of  brand  product  in  purchase  act  as  well  as    media  following  and  selection  done  by  youngsters,  relation  towards  advertisement  and  investigation  of  consumeristic  and  materialistic  attitudes  in  children,  especially  while  influenced  by  advertisement.  The  creation of a unique communication strategy by a company that operates in the market of  children's products and services is different to that applied by a company that implements  general communication strategy.  The application of integrated marketing communication's  model  towards  youngsters  implies  respect  of  ethical  principles,  rules  and  codex  in  performing all marketing activities that are focused on children.   The  main  hypothesis  starts  from  the  attitude  that  through  integrated  marketing  communications  the  mass  communication  is  abandoned  and  that  company  exceeds  on  aimed access of contacts to both permanent and potentional customers on ethical manner.  Thanks to auxilliary hypotheses the research shows the influence of advertisement towards  youngsters; the measuring effects of brand products and services in the purchase done by  children;  appearance  of  conflicts  between  parent  –  child  as  a  consequence  of  frequent  exposure to the advertisement; comparison of the world in the advertisement and the one  in  the  real  life  and  potential  increase  of  materialistic  values  in  children  as  a  result  of  advertisements' stimulations.   The results show that junior schoolars (lower classes of primary school) in relation to the  senior  schoolars  (higher  classes  of  primary  school)  have  more  positive  attitude  to  the  advertising as well as the preference of branded products and services. Unequivocally it  has  been  determined  that  frequent  exposure  to  advertisements  induces  youngsters  to  request  purchase  and  therefore  increases  conflicts  in  relation  parent  –  child.  Mainly  children do not believe that world shown in the advertisement corresponds to the world in  a  reality.  It  has  been  confirmed  that  materialistic  values  in  children  increase  due  to  advertisement stimulae.