Knowledge is the crucial factor of human resource development. The application of contemporary knowledge is a necessity for the individual and the company to survive and be competitive in the market. We can acquire knowledge during the educational process, trough formal and informal learning in schools and colleges, and later in the companies, in traditional and online environments. Today in science, major attention is given to electronic learning (e-learning) and electronic education (e-education) using modern information-communication technologies. This PhD considers informal forms of e-learning using Web 2.0 tools as well as features and benefits of their integration into the formal educational processes. Although forms and methods of e-learning are relatively well-known, they are still not sufficiently implemented especially in our settings. This paper explores the impacts of the implementation of informal forms of e-learning using Web 2.0 tools (e-learning 2.0) in stimulating the potential of human resources. The concept of personal learning environment as a way of structuring the informal e-learning 2.0 is applied. In this sense, the changes from pedagogy to pedagogy 2.0 are considered. Those changes are reflected trough the fact that from an environment controlled by the teacher and strictly prescribed didactical learning regime, we go to social, collaborative and participatory approach in designing tasks and student engagement, and to learner-centered approach and the pedagogy 2.0. vii In order to verify in practice pre-defined concepts pedagogical model for the design of a personal environment for e-learning 2.0 is created and applied trough an action research study. Survey is used to test knowledge of Web 2.0 tools and to analyze how students use these tools for learning. Subjects in the survey were students of the Faculty of Organizational Sciences, of all years and fields of study. It was concluded that the use of informal e-learning 2.0 in colleges significantly depends on the students‘ individual characteristics and potentials and field of study on one hand, and of teachers and their course organization on the other. In that sense, students that are at their fourth year of study and are studying information systems and technologies are identified as a suitable population to test the created model. In order to explore the possibilities of using personal learning environments (PLE) in the formal process of education as a way of structuring the informal e- learning 2.0, action research study is conducted on the E-Learning course at the Faculty of Organizational Sciences. For this purpose pedagogical PLE model for e-learning 2.0 was created. Pedagogical PLE model for e-learning 2.0 represents a new model for designing a personal learning environment for e-learning 2.0 - a model for structuring informal e-learning 2.0. Also, as a part of the model an activity algorithm as a framework for model implementation trough teaching process is designed. In this regard, it has been shown that it is possible to apply the pedagogical PLE model for e-learning 2.0 in the formal educational process. It is also shown that the most students have positive attitudes about the organization of learning in this way and experiencing this kind of learning as creative and interesting. Based on the exhibited above, the general conclusion is that it is possible to innovate formal educational process by using a pedagogical PLE model for e- learning 2.0 based on a informal learning concept. In this way, to some extent, viii the development potential of human resources, future employees, could be influenced trough improving the skills needed to work in the 2.0 environment in order to prepare them better for future contemporary working environment.