The first part of this dissertation presents analysis of the routing protocols in
data center topologies. Emphasis is put on two-phase routing protocols which enable
congestion avoidance in data center topologies, which are regular and have significant
number of alternative paths. This dissertation proposes new two-phase routing
algorithm, LB-ECR, which enables better utilization of data center networks. Using the
method of linear programming, LB-ECR maximises the loss-free throughput for the
given required traffic of the switches. LB-ECR is based on ECMP routing which is
common in data centers due to its utilization of alternative equal-cost paths. Two-phase
balancing enables simplification of the linear model by eliminating traffic flows and
decreases the possibility of congestion by distributing traffic among less used links.
Simplification of the linear model simplifies its solution for large data centers. The first
part of this dissertation gives an overview of the network topologies and the routing in
data centers, and performance comparison of different routing algorithms in typical
data center topologies.
In addition to the routing optimization, this dissertation examines the algorithms
for updating the lookup tables of Internet routers. The second part of this dissertation
provides an overview of the lookup and update algorithms. Updating performance of
two advanced lookup algorithms is examined. We develop formulas for the worst-case
memory requirements for two fast lookup algorithms, while we show through
simulations the memory requirements for typical routing tables. We also evaluate the
number of memory accesses to the lookup modules during updates, the complexity of
the updating algorithms, as well as their execution time for typical routing tables.
The third part of this dissertation encompasses description of the
implementations of the two-phase routing algorithms and of the lookup update
algorithms, as well as the integration of these components inside the router.