Wireless sensor networks are systems that consist of a number of small 
computational devices, called sensor nodes. A sensor node is also equipped with one 
or more sensors for gathering data from the environment, and is capable of 
establishing radio communications with other nodes in the network. Wireless 
sensor networks can produce large amounts of data, making them suitable for 
applying machine learning techniques. The goal of the work presented here is the 
adaptation of selected data mining algorithms for distributed execution, so that they 
can be run directly on the sensor nodes. 
 
Through the analyses of the problem, three basic requirements for a distributed 
dataTmining algorithm suitable for execution in a wireless sensor network have 
been reached. First, minimizing the communication between the nodes is of 
paramount importance, since commination consumes significant amounts of energy. 
Second, the algorithm should yield accurate results. Third, use of centralized 
computational resources should be avoided as much as possible. 
 
The major contribution of the work presented in this thesis comes in the form of 
two novel algorithms for distributed machine learning, that are adapted to suit the 
needs of the execution in a wireless sensor network. First of the two algorithms is a 
classification scheme that consists out of two layers. The first layer is executed on 
the sensor nodes, and can utilize any type of a classifier (the approach was tested 
using J48 decision trees). The results of this step are than propagated to a 
centralized, second layer classifier that is based on a weighted voting scheme. The 
second of the two algorithms is a clustering algorithm, based on Kohonen neural 
networks. The architecture of the network is adapted to the nature of the data that 
are obtained from sensor nodes in wireless sensor networks. Such data contain two 
sources of variability: the information about the location of an event that has taken 
place and is being sensed and the properties of the event that has taken place. Based 
on this observation, the proposed Kohonen neural network is constructed two 
contain two layers, the first layer clustering data with respect to the location of 
origin, and the second layer that clusters data with respect to the underlying event 
type. 
 
Calculations show that both of the proposed algorithms offer significant savings in 
terms of energy consumption. The accuracy of the algorithms was verified using 
computational simulations. In conclusion, the proposed algorithms are suitable for a 
number of practical applications, while the machine learning techniques present a 
viable approach to building sustainable large wireless sensor networks. 