In spite of great developments in artificial intelligence, human brain is still more powerful, concerning the comprehension and manipulation with partially known facts. One domain where this is prominent is related to a problem of question answering. When it comes to giving the answers, especially those that do not explicitly exist in the text corpus, the advantages of a human expert are abilities like explaining, combining complex answers, and abstract reasoning. Intelligent Question Routing Systems (IQRS) serve as a knowledge exchange medium in an arbitrary field of expertise, where intensive communication between users is required. The benefit coming from deployment of such systems includes: (a) reducing unnecessary “pingingž of experts, which are a valuable resource and (b) increasing the system owners’ (e.g. enterprise, government, university) quality of service, since users are more satisfied with answers, because their questions are answered by the right persons. This dissertation represents a methodology for IQRS systems design. It starts with a survey of the existing research in this domain, where the emphasis was put on the implementation of phases of the IQRS process. The survey also introduces an original presentation paradigm that generalizes the essence of approaches found in the open literature. The presentation paradigm includes three basic processing stages related to the three major problems of system implementation: question analysis, question forwarding, and users’ knowledge profiling. The outcome of this analysis is a proposal for a new approach that tackles identified problems. The rest of the dissertation describes an IQRS prototype which implements the proposed ideas. The question analysis module implements an approach that enables question visualization, thus it provides an intuitive representation of specific relations 9 between concepts and their importance in the question. Also, this approach combines a fully automatic text processing and manual correction of the results, giving a users ability to increase the accuracy of the output. Simultaneously, the implemented text processing module is used for the analysis of answers. Next, an analysis and discussion of existing approaches for determining the semantic similarity of two short texts is given, where particularly the focus was put on those suitable for languages with very limited electronic linguistic resources, like the Serbian language. Based on the conclusions a new algorithm is proposed, named LInSTSS, which for calculating the semantic similarity between two short texts includes the specificity of words that these texts contain. Additionally, a Serbian paraphrase corpus is constructed and the results obtained using this corpus showed that the proposed algorithm provides better results when compared to existing solutions. Finally, evaluation on paraphrase corpora both for English and Serbian is used to fine-tune algorithm parameters. Also, the lessons learned are applied to design the module for calculating the semantic similarity between a question and a user profile. In the question forwarding phase issues related to the problem of comparing questions and user profiles are discussed and a new algorithm called P2Q is proposed. This algorithm determines the highest (maximum) similarity between the concepts identified in question and those from the user profile. Finally, the analysis of available web portals is carried in order to find the one suitable for the creation of a questions and answers corpus. In the created corpus three different types of users are extracted, which model: (1) interests, (2) knowledge, and (3) both knowledge and interests. Corpus is then used to test the initial hypothesis and to evaluate the overall system performances. The results showed that P2Q approach provides significantly better results than other evaluated approaches. It was also noted that the use of semantic information extraction from text can improve results. Scientific contribution of the dissertation is in the field of analysis and synthesis of a software system, which should enable an intelligent questions routing. Also, based on the evaluation results it was found that properly assigned weights can 10 improve the overall performances of the system, but also if not assigned correctly performances can be significantly decreased. Finally, it was concluded that for profiling the user competence to give an answer for the provided question it is important not only to consider answers which the user best answered, i.e. to profile knowledge, but also it is important to consider questions which can express interests.