This thesis proposes to combine two different fields of study, that of information systems and that of operational research, through the application of various soft computing and optimization techniques in the service-oriented approach to modern software development. Service-orientation represents a new generation approach for developing distributed applications and business process automation which can increase business efficiency, agility and productivity, and as such has grown to be widely adopted. It is based on the idea that distributed applications can be flexibly and dynamically composed by integrating independently developed software components – services (which may be developed on different platforms and in different programming languages). The application of service-oriented paradigm principles leads to the development of services whose functionality is independent of any specific business process and which can therefore be used in various applications in different ways. Web services are physically independent software components, accessible on the Internet, which provide certain functionality. Due to the fact that they are based on a set of widely adopted standards they are the predominant approach for implementing modern service-oriented software solutions. With the proliferation of web services offering similar functionality (due to the fact that they are independently developed and published on the Internet) the problem of how to choose the best one, from a vast collection of suitable services, is becoming increasingly important. The non-functional properties of services (Quality of Service – QoS) thus play an important role in the process. Furthermore, the selection is usually based on multiple non-functional characteristics which are very heterogeneous in nature. On the other hand, when the desired functionality cannot be provided by a single service but might be achieved by executing a set of services, each providing part of the desired functionality, the task becomes even more complex. A service composition represents an aggregation of services collaborating collectively to automate a specific task or business process. The main benefit of this approach to application development is that existing services can be used for achieving new business demands or automating new business processes (either by expanding existing compositions or by creating new ones) with less effort and in a more cost effective way. The web service selection problem for a composition consists of choosing actual services, for each component of the established composition, in such a manner that the resulting composition not only fulfills the desired functional requirements but is also optimal in terms of the relevant QoS requirements. Furthermore, when selecting services for a composition the basis for the selection should be the performances of the composite service as a whole. The main challenge, which arises when computing the overall QoS for a web service composition, is that the QoS values need to be aggregated in some way and that the nature of the aggregation depends on the chosen QoS attributes as well as the actual structure of the composition. In addition, certain constraints regarding the required QoS levels of the composition are also often given. A critical review of the existing approaches for modeling these problems is given and the drawbacks of many approaches are discussed. Namely, most of the existing approaches only allow the selection of services based on quantitative QoS attributes, require linear functions for the aggregation of QoS values when determining the QoS of the composition and presume the assignment of arbitrary weights and normalization of the actual QoS values. In order to overcome these issues two new models are proposed which do not require the assignment of arbitrary preferences or the normalization QoS values. Furthermore the aim was also to allow the users to more adequately specify the trade- offs they might be willing to make which can usually only be formulated as complex verbal statements. Thus first the of application of Boolean consistent fuzzy logic is proposed since it enables expressing complex verbal statements in the form of logical demands which are defined in the Boolean frame. Moreover logical aggregation results in a new structure of the components as opposed to the weighted sum approach. The application of Boolean consistent fuzzy logic is preferred since conventional fuzzy logic does not allow for taking into account statements which include negation, i.e. in such cases conventional fuzzy logic does not satisfy the axioms of excluded middle and contradiction. A second novel approach is proposed for situations when there are no logical demands regarding the relevant criteria but the criteria are heterogeneous and expressed using several measurement units. In such cases the problem can be modeled as a discrete multi-objective fractional programming problem (MOFP). The initial criteria would be paired taking into account the nature (unit measure and type) so that all of the fractional objectives have the same unit and can be optimized in the same direction. For the selection of services for a particular functionality, an innovative approach based on the combination of the Analytical Hierarchy Process method (AHP) and Boolean consistent fuzzy logic is proposed to allow for the selection of services on the basis of logical demands regarding the QoS criteria. Given that certain criteria may influence or be influenced by other criteria, as well as the fact that the importance of the criteria may vary based upon the demonstrated level of other criteria, on the one hand, and the fact the traditional AHP method lacks support for this type of problem on the other, it is proposed that logical functions could be used to take into account these relationships. The illustrative examples point out that the conventional and consistent fuzzy approaches can lead to the choice of different alternatives. For the selection of services for a composition several methods are proposed. First, an adaptation of an existing exact method for solving the posed MOFP problem is presented. For larger, time-critical problems, such as the dynamic selection of services (when the services are to be selected just prior or even during the execution of the composition) the use of heuristic methods is advocated. To this end, the use the well- known Variable Neighborhood Search (VNS) metaheuristic is applied, for the first time, for the selection of services. Then a novel metaheuristic based on tabu search and VNS is presented. It is shown that both methods can be used for solving both the MMKP (Multi-dimensional Multiple-choice 0-1 Knapsack Problem) model (as one of the most common approaches in literature) and the proposed model based on consistent fuzzy logic. In addition novel method is proposed for generating an initial feasible solution of the MMKP problem. The validation of the proposed approaches is supported by a specially developed software solution. Finally, the possibility of a wider application of the proposed approaches is discussed.