Proliferation of data and devices led to the rapid development of technology and machine learning algorithms used in data analysis and processing systems. With a large amount of data in systems for their analysis and processing, system's performance depends solely on the quality of the data, the selected algorithm and the algorithm's parameters. Data anomalies are instances that differ from data distribution, affect data quality, and can be detected using machine learning algorithms. Selected algorithm and the parameters for anomaly detection depend exclusively on the expertise of the system creator or domain expert. In cases where there is no sample data with labeled anomalies, which is often the case in real-world, choosing right algorithm for anomaly detection is not trivial problem. Algorithm selection for anomaly detection tasks can be automated by using automated machine learning system (AutoML) that proposes an algortihm for detecting anomalies based on data and meta-features. A growing number of research papers shed light on AutoML frameworks, which are becoming a promising solution for building complex machine learning models without human expertise and assistance. The key challenge in enabling AutoML frameworks to build an efficient model for anomaly detection tasks is to determine the best underlying model for a given task and optimization metric. The meta- learning approaches based on a set of meta features that describes data properties can enable efficient model selection in AutoML frameworks. The existing meta-learning approaches based on statistical and information-theoretic meta features require large amounts of data and computational resources to extract data properties. The subject of research within this doctoral dissertation is the development of an extensible system for extracting meta features based on domain-specific knowledge. In order to evaluate the proposed set of meta-features, the goal is to compare the existing solutions through different aspects of complexity against the proposed solution. Also, the goal is to design experiments and get results that can be used in future research in the field of automated machine learning in general. Based on the evaluation of experimental results, it is shown that the proposed meta features achieve accuracy of 87% and meet the critical requirements for application in AutoML systems, while the existing solutions achieve accuracy of 73%. In cases where there is no significant number of datasets available for evaluation, the proposed solution achieves 25% worse performance compared against the existing solutions. The significance of the research is the possibility of implementing AutoML systems based on the proposed set of meta features. In cases where there is no sample data with labeled anomalies, or data is not present, the data creator or domain expert will be able to effectively characterize the anomalies in the data, based on domain-specific knowledge.