Based on the fact that our planet is inhabited by more than 7 billion people, and by 2050 the population growth expected at around 9 billion, the identification of person while protecting privacy is a major challenge. From the perspective of collectively security, authentication based on biometric identification has become a dominant requirement by many governments and agencies involved in security affairs. In addition, a number of private owning companies are also involved in the development of biometric identification technology taking an opportunity to access a highly profitable market that was exclusively dedicated for the government sector. United States as an economicaly and technologically most developed country, despite the economic problems, pay special attention and invests huge funds to improve biometric identification, especially after the terrorist attacks that took place 11th September 2001. year. In addition to the U.S., China, whose economy recorded impressive growth during the global economic crisis, also making great efforts to develop mechanisms for biometric identification of individuals. Bearing in mind that China is the most populous country challenge of biometric identification gets a new dimension. In India, the motive of introducing biometric identification technology is diametrically different from the motives of the United States and most other countries, and it is not related to security issues, but for a far more vital issues - the distribution of food. The European Union is also making great efforts in the development and application of biometric identification, leads by the Netherlands, who approached the problem systematically. Privacy of collected biometric data depends, above all, of the attitude and policies of organizations dealing with the acquisition and storage of biometric data, and methods for protecting collected data. Even if we assume that they are state institutions - "trusted" institutions, abuse, however, are ever-present danger. Balance between security and privacy are considerd by many researchers around the world. In recent decades, a number of different approaches to this problem is presented. Development of information technology, contributed the development of new approaches to the problem due the new opportunities. It is necessary to bear in mind that the biometric data are data with "noise", which means that they do not always represent at the same manner. The consequence of this fact is that certain principles of reasoning in classical logic can not be applied directly in this field. Also, the usage of cryptographic procedures using biometric data is not possible because the biometric data does not meet the criteria required by cryptography. Fuzzy Logic offers a new approach which is close to the human way of thinking and it is used in a variety of considerations and proposed solutions for biometric identification. Some of the solutions proposed extracting cryptographic keys directly from the biometric data, using fuzzy extractor functions. Fuzzy extractor functions take care about the uncertainty of measurements of biometric data. After introducing the randomization and using specific procedures, fuzzy extractor function creates an unique "key" - a fuzzy sketch. On the other side there are solutions that propose the independent creation of an cryptographic key, which meets all the requirements of cryptographic and then combine it with the biometric data. Within this group of proposed solutions there are a various error correcting methods are used to compensate the fuzziness of the biometric data. Some authors suggest the usage of sequence of error correcting methods. Media for archiving can be varied while the polycarbonate card with microcontroller is proposed as a common solution. Previous solutions can be considered from multiple angles and therefore can be distinguished for their good and bad characteristic. The main disantvatage for solutions with the fuzzy sketch is the appearance of biometric features in an open format during decoding process. In addition, the process of fuzzy sketch decryption is not sufficiently reliable to be used in practical applications. The solutions with independent creation of an cryptographic key and its combination with the biometric data gives better results than the solution with the sketch. There are also the opinions that the solutions with the sketch could be enhanced by improveing their mathematical models, but in this case the main shortcomings remain - the visibility of unprotected biometric data at some point in the process. The usage of different or successively combined error correcting methods more or less give good results. Some of those solutions that are treated iris as a biometric data gives correct results. These solutions can not be efficiently used for the processing of fingerprints because of the different nature of the binary representation of iris and fingerprint. The solution proposed in this paper, treats the fingerprint as biometric data. After identifying and distinguishing minutiae - the characteristic points of the fingerprint, the two independent templates are created. The first template is used for identification process, while the other template combines biometrics with pre-built cryptographic key. The cryptographic key is previously processed with the error correction encoding. The proposed solution uses the Slepian Wolf encoding. The second template is encrypted biometric information with incorporated cryptographic key. Both templates are then stored on a token such as a card with a microprocessor. During the reconstruction of the cryptographic key the original biometric - fingerprint must be present. The first step is the identification, which determines whether it is the same fingerprint, or the same person. After positive identification, key reconstruction is processing by separating the cryptographic key from fingerprint and re-applying Slepian Wolf encoding on cryptographic key to correct the errors. Further, the cryptographic key can be used in the standard cryptographic operations. The proposed solution significantly reduces the errors in person identification, and in the process of cryptographic key reconstruction. Therefore, it is efficient and suitable for practical use. At the same time it improves the security of the original fingerprint image, which is not visible in the open form at any stage of the process. The solution outlined in this paper is resistant to a wide range of possible attacks when attackers want to compromise biometric data and therefore the person identity itself. 