W3C proposed the XML as standard that used in web applications, transactions, documentations, database management systems and to exchange information between systems over the Internet. XML allows storing different data regardless of how it will be displayed. XML has been used to create, update and query databases. Create and write clear human-readable XML documents as well as machine-readable are easy, so it's easy to create applications that process these XML documents. Generally, all kinds of information can be expressed as XML documents. In recent years, the growth of Arabic content and numbers of users on the Internet has greatly increased. Arabic is a widely spoken language with more than 375 million speakers and over 155 million, or over forty percent of these Arabic-speaking people use the Internet. This represents nearly five percent of all the Internet users in the world. The number of Arabian speaking Internet users has grown by a factor of sixty in the last fifteen years (2000- 2015). This growth in usage has outpaced the growth in information retrieval systems, summarization of Arabic text (such as documents and web pages), query processes and natural language processors.  The Arabic word has different forms of syntax and morphologies with different meanings. Grammatically, documents contain different forms of words including derivations. This causes problems in text processing, document summarization and information retrieval systems. Furthermore, there is a high level of information loss during the processes of querying, document summarizing and information retrieval, especially with large documents, as information loss is directly proportional to the size of documents during these processes. This thesis describes an RAX System designed for ranking Arabic documents in information retrieval processes. The proposed solution basically depends on the similarity of textual content. The model we have designed can be used for documents stored in the different formats and written in Arabic language. Due the complex lingual semantics of this language the proposed solution uses a pure statistical approach. The design and implementation are based on existing text processing frameworks and referent Arabic grammar. The main focus of our research has been the evaluation of different similarity measures used for classifying Arabic documents from different domains and different document categories based on query criteria provided by the user. Further, the thesis will study the security issues of the RAX system. These issues combined between XML security (XML digital signature and XML encryption) and the SOAP message to create a secret environment between an end user and the RAX system model as well as study the security attacks and countermeasures. Keywords: Text similarity measures, Text classification, Processing Arabic documents, XML Documents, Securing XML Documents. 