Cloud computing paradigm, like the paradigm of network computing, is based on the clustering of resources and on the usage of network and Internet technologies. In general, the cloud computing refers to a new way of delivering computing resources in a form of service, such as data, software and hardware components (processing elements, memory and storage). Cloud computing is a current and important multidisciplinary ﬁeld, followed by a large number of published papers in the state-of-the-art international journals, as well as in the proceedings of the world-renowned international conferences. Based on the scientiﬁc results which have been gathered from the published papers in this domain, it can be concluded that there are many challenges and problems in the cloud environment, which can be more eﬃciently tackled by applying improved methods, techniques and algorithms. One of the most important challenges in cloud computing is scheduling of end users’ requests on a limited set of available resources (virtual machines). A scheduling problem in cloud environment can be deﬁned as an execution schedule of tasks on a limited set of available resources, taking into account the potential constraints and objective function. Task scheduling is performed by scheduling algorithms, which can be divided into static and dynamic. In the case of a static scheduling, where it is not possible to dynamically switch tasks from over utilized to underutilized virtual machines, tasks are being allocated for execution on available virtual machines before the scheduling algorithm execution. In the case of the dynamic scheduling methods, which are known in the literature as load balancing approaches, a workload allocation between active virtual machines is being performed during the scheduling algorithm run-time. Requests’ redistribution is executed by dynamically switching from over utilized to less utilized virtual machines. Heuristics and metaheuristics optimization methods are mostly used for dynamic scheduling, where they have achieved great results. Task scheduling and load balancing problems in cloud computing belong to the group of NP hard combinatorial and/or global problems with or without constraints. Based on the published results in the relevant literature, it can be concluded that the swarm intelligence metaheuristics have been successfully tested on benchmark and practical NP hard optimization problems, and that they have achieved better results in terms of convergence speed and the solutions’ quality, than other methods, techniques and algorithms. In experiments performed for the purpose of this doctoral thesis, it is examined whether it is possible to further improve the task scheduling and load balancing in cloud computing environment by applying swarm intelligence metaheuristics. During the experimental research, several swarm intelligence metaheuristics were improved and adapted for solving task scheduling and load balancing problems in cloud environment. The implementation of two improved swarm intelligence algorithms - the monarch butterﬂy optimization algorithm and whale optimization algorithm - are presented in the dissertation. Two task scheduling models have been considered. The ﬁrst model belongs to the group of single-objective optimization, where the criteria is the minimization of execution time of all tasks on the cloud. The second model belongs to the category of multi-objective optimization, that considers minimizing the execution time of all tasks on the cloud and the total cost of utilized cloud resources. The simulations were performed in a robust CloudSim simulator environment, and both algorithms were tested against the set of artiﬁcial data (generated within the CloudSim platform), and real data (retrieved from a globally available benchmark database). Besides testing swarm intelligence algorithms on practical cloud problems, in order to more accurately measure the improvements of modiﬁed metaheuristics over the original versions, both improved algorithms have also been validated by conducting simulations on standard benchmark sets for unconstrained global optimization. By comparing generated results (solution quality and convergence rate) of improved metaheuristics with the results of the best known metaheuristics and heuristics from the literature, that have been applied to the same problem instances (for practical cloud scheduling problem and benchmark tests), the quality of the proposed metaheuristics was validated, thus conﬁrming the basic hypothesis of this dissertation that the tasks scheduling and load balancing in cloud computing can be further enhanced by utilizing swarm intelligence algorithms.