Research shows that end users have largely focused from social networking to communication platforms (Viber, WhatsApp, FB messenger, Instagram, etc.). Artificial intelligence, along with the notion of digital transformation, is a major step in modernizing the business company of each industry. In the battle against COVID 19, and in the development of innovative solutions that provide added value, chatbot was launched into the digital world. It is a software that imitate human conversation and help user to get the right information and facilitate day-to-day services. In the last decade, the huge improvement of communication platforms and networking technologies has provided new technical opportunities for the adoption of chatbots in various sectors, such as e-commerc, customer support, marketing and education. The Chatbot is a software program that imitates conversation using artificial intelligence and engages in dialogue with humans using natural language understanding through textual and voice messages. Chatbot uses artificial intelligence in order to find answers and solve the user’s requests. In step with new trends, the methodological framework for the development of modern chatbot architecture based on artificial intelligence for the next generation of the Internet community is defined. Accordingly, the biggest problem in the development of the adaptive platform is solving the problem of flexibility of integration, defining the mechanism of independence of chatbots from only one service for natural language understanding (NLU) which would ensure adequate adaptability. The proposed methodology provides a general procedure and is the result of a combination of different methodological approaches. According to the defined methodology, the process of developing an adaptive chatbot based on NLU is divided into two basic phases: project engineering and application engineering. Each of these phases is then divided into activities. The advantage of this separation is the realization of an adaptable platform for generating chatbots. It is also proposed scalable and extensible chatbot architecture supporting different services for natural language understanding and communication channels. The paper describes the logical and physical architecture of chatbots. The independence of the NLU service is ensured through appropriate metamodels and their mapping rules. The thesis provides its own independent framework for reducing dependence on suppliers that deal with the services of natural language understanding and communication channels. In this way, independence is gained from any service for understanding natural language, which will not tie the solution to one service, but the proposed mechanism will provide easy mapping and switching from one to another new NLU service. Finally, one implementation of the proposed solution is summarized through a case study. The Academic Digital Assistant (ADA) is the first educational project in the Balkans that provides better communication, save time, and deliver services faster and more efficiently. The ADA receives messages from various messaging communication platforms (Viber, FB Messenger, Instagram, and the website). The chatbot platform performs a number of important tasks before sending a message to the NLU. The NLU analyzes the text based on machine learning techniques, compares, and then generates intent and its entities. The generated result is sent back to the chatbot platform, which uses a certain algorithm of intent, entities, and context and sends a response to the user in the appropriate format to display the message. ADA is available 24 hours a day and provides answers to frequently asked questions from students and prospective students. ADA knows over 250 scenarios regarding questions an appropriate service that students want to be performed. Some of the scenarios are exam registration, change of examiner, semester certification, information on teacher consultations, deadlines, academy ranking, lecture schedule, student rating, events, service availability, academic environment, date of lectures and exams, activities taking place within the academy and other useful academic information. 