The systems and processes approaches and structural and object oriented modeling give the best result in designing, development and ICT security practice. The system security processes that transform inputs into outputs and expectedly improve value of the outputs parameters, integrate procedures, tools and skillful and motivated people to perform security practice tasks. The security processes should be continuously evaluated and improved, since owners, managers and common users have generally underdeveloped security awareness and security technologies and experts are relatively expensive. The process oriented standards and models based on CMM (Capability Maturity Model), particularly SSE CMM (System Security Engineering Capability Maturity Model) have been developed to evaluate quality, and measure progress of process maturity and improvement. Comparative analyses of standards and models correlation, based on system, process or environment approaches, indicate there are number of possibilities to establish more frame for process evaluation and improvement. The CMMs that integrate processes (SSE CMM, CMMI) provide integrated and unique frame to evaluate and improve different processes. The SSE CMM Integrate SSE (11), project-managing (5) and organizational (6) process areas. In the SSE CMM, process performance quality and maturity are measured by specific system and process oriented metric, based on basic (BP) and generic (GP) practices performance and implementation criteria. The SSE CMM metric rates the capability (CL) and maturity (ML) levels into 5 active levels. The SSAM (System Security Appraisal Method) based on the SSE CMM model, is specifically developed to perform verification type of evaluation that not only discover but verify objective data of the BP and GP practices performance an implementation. Experimental evaluation of the current ESS processes on three evaluated projects and processes improvement action plan proposal confirm declared users acceptability and applicability of the SSE CMM model and the SSAM method to the security processes evaluation and improvement for the optimal security program development, security organization profiling and number of the other ICT security application. 