We are witnessing that mobile devices have become an inseparable part of our everyday life. First of all, thanks to social networks and fast news flow. However, in the past just about a decade ago, mobile applications were designed exclusively for special purposes. Also, the operational functionality of these devices and applications was far below the existing ones. Such a development of mobile devices led to the development of scientific disciplines that did not seem to be in a relationship, but evaluated their synergy through the development of mobile devices and their applications. It is primarily meant for telecommunications, electronics, software engineering and Internet technology. The high speed developments in these areas have enabled mobile devices to achieve the functionality of classic PCs, but also to continue to make progress in the future. One of the limiting factors is the autonomy and energy independence of the device. In other words, with the existing battery technology, some significant autonomy of the device cannot be achieved. The economic market dictates the need for fast processors, smaller dimensions of the device (thickness), but also the larger dimensions of the screen. Also, there is a very important functionality of the mobile cell Internet without which mobile devices would not be so useable. One of the goals of the mobile device maker is how to keep all these functionalities and increase the energy efficiency, and energy autonomy of the device. Increasing the energy efficiency of the device can be achieved through hardware and software innovations. Very well know is that the usage of internet is one of the biggest power drain reasons, so it lead to the conclusion that this is the right place for optimization. One of the answers is covered in the current concept of mobile services. Most applications on the mobile device function according to the master slave communication principle with some of the many servers. In other words, the application and server exchange significant amounts of data in both directions. Whether it's a simple reading of messages or an application for weather forecasts, some social network or an on- line strategy. The application sends and receives complex data structures. Currently in the era of object-oriented programming languages, all these data can be treated as lists and series of class instances, objects The process of packing and unloading of complex data structures into a series of bytes suitable for sending is called data serialisation. This paper deals with research results into energy-efficient transmission of serialised data between servers and mobile devices. A test environment was created in which the research authors primarily measured the electricity consumption during the communication with a server. The measurement results have been used to create a mathematical model which was later introduced with functions, serving as parameters, which depict the time necessary for serialisation and the size of a serialised file. The data collected through this research have been used for an experimental API-CBSaver, which on the basis of mathematical models chooses the most favourable manner of serialisation and compression in real time. The results obtained through the API-CBSaver test indicate the direction which one should take for the purposes of improving energy efficiency.  