Medicine is one of the sciences where signiﬁcant progress was facilitated due to digital images and digital image processing. Processing medical digital images using computers can drastically speed up the diagnosis process by revealing even the slightest changes in tissues that cannot be detected with the naked eye. Medical image processing includes images generated by various sources such as X-ray, ultrasound, magnetic resonance, and acquired by diﬀerent devices such as various scanners, microscopic images, endoscopic capsules and others. Continuous progress in medical imaging technology has led to high resolution images, three- dimensional anatomical and physiological images. On the other hand, this progress introduced new problems and challenges in medical image processing. Many of these problems represent hard optimization problems for which nature inspired algorithms, especially swarm intelligence algorithms, have been successfully used for more than two decades. In order to apply these algorithms for medical digital image processing optimization problems, it is necessary to modify and adjust them for a particular problem. This topic represents an active research ﬁeld, which can be concluded based on large number of scientiﬁc and professional articles, books, journals and conferences dedicated to it. In this thesis several swarm intelligence algorithms and their application to various medical digital image processing optimization problems are presented. Speciﬁcally, bat algorithm, ﬁreworks algorithm and ﬁreﬂy algorithm were used for retina image registration, brain MRI segmentation, bleeding detection in endoscopic capsule images, image compression, leukemia detection in microscopic images and emphysema detection in CT lung images. Each of the considered problems is speciﬁc and swarm intelligence algorithms have been adjusted for tackling them. Modiﬁed and customized swarm intelligence algorithms for application in the processing of medical digital images were tested on standard benchmark test images assembled for the problems under consideration. By comparing proposed methods for improving medical digital image processing using swarm intelligence algorithms with other state-of-the-art algorithms from literature, it has been shown that better results were obtained, which leads to the conclusion that better methods and techniques for solving optimization problems that occur when analyzing and processing medical digital images can be found by adjusting and applying swarm intelligence algorithms. Keywords: medical digital images, digital image processing, segmentation, registration, compression, detection of anomalies, classiﬁcation, optimization, metaheuristics, swarm intelligence.