Due to the complexity of adaptive e-education process, we haven’t had many papers up to now, which researched this field from the methodical aspect, as well as the aspect of developing integrated system of e-education. Consequently, the material given in this paper has a specific value and presents a significant contribution. E-education is a complex system that includes distance learning, distance teaching, teaching materials in various forms, individual and group learning, tutoring and interactive work. Preferences of students and learning styles should be considered in order to increase efficiency and effectiveness of e-education systems. In order to identify students’ preferences, data from business information systems, data collected through a distance education system, data collected in surveys and subjective assessments of teachers are used. Adaptation, the process that creates a change in the system based on system knowledge of the student, is performed using these data. Primary goals that can be realized by adaptation of an e-education system are: improving the design and utility of the course, increasing the loyalty of students, help in finding information on the course, advanced searching and storing results of search in the context of students’ interests. The main hypothesis developed and proved within this dissertation is that implementation of an adaptive model within the LMS system in electronic education can enhance educational process, raise the quality level of business processes in e-education and justify the expense of its induction. Application of the developed adaptive model can solve problems of remote education such as: adjustment of teaching material to students' needs, realization of quality reporting system based on data collected in learning management systems, realization of an electronic learning portal, and others. In this way one accomplishes: an increase of the number of students enrolled and graduated, a decrease of expenses, better usage of funds, making better decisions etc. This doctoral dissertation discusses in detail the application of adaptive methods and techniques in electronic education, with the aim of buildling an adaptive model for the subject Programming for Internet. The experimental part was implemented as an adaptive electronic course for programming in JAVA programming language, at the Informatics laboratory of the Professional Studies College of Technology in Sabac, Serbia. Relevant parameters were measured and results analyzed by carrying out standard statistical methods. The research results show that students attending the course adapted through the demonstrated methods and techniques, have achieved better results compared to the students attending the non adapted course. 