The stock-out phenomenon is one of the biggest problems in retail business, because it directly leads to lost sales, reduced profits and potential loss of customers. Although the stock- out rate largely depends on the business practices of retail chains and can significantly vary due to the impact of many factors, the global average falls within the range of 5 - 10%. Such high stock-out rate can lead to an average financial loss in the amount of 4% of the total turnover of the retail chain. The main objective of this study was to examine all the relevant aspects that may influence the increase of stock-outs in retail, and the capabilities of automated ordering system to answer to some of these challenges. In this regard, the review of literature included organizational, operational and technological aspects of the stock-out problem. A detailed examination of the stock-out phenomenon and various concepts of automated ordering system in retail provided the necessary conditions for the measurement of automated ordering system effectiveness. The main goal of this study was to establish the connection between the different stock- keeping units' (SKU) attributes and stock-out performance in retail business, and to examine the capabilities of automated ordering system to respond to the challenges associated with SKUs classified as risky. The data sample came from a large retailer in Serbia, and included two high-risk product categories consisting of a total of 115 items and 97 stores, observed in time period of one calendar year. A perpetual inventory aggregation method was used for the identification of stock-outs, whereas probit regression and t-test statistics were used for the measurement of the impact of SKU attributes and performance of ordering system. Stock-out rate analysis, prior to the main statistical analysis, recognized some patterns of stock-out variation, such as weekly fluctuations, differences in performance between SKUs and product categories, which can reveal some potential causes of stock-outs and provide significant input for further analysis. The measurement of the impact of potentially high-risk SKU attributes on stock-out performance showed that the availability of products in distribution center, as well as promotional activity and the sales speed have a detrimental impact on stock-out performance. Beneficial effects, in terms of a reduced number of stock-outs, were observed when the ordering process was performed with the usage of the automated ordering system. However, retailer- risk category proved to be more sensitive to promotion and sales speed. Statistical analysis showed that the automated ordering system achieves significantly better performance compared to the manual one in relation to the cheaper items, items on promotion, faster items and items with great variation in sales, while the was not proved on the sample of the items with larger packaging. In contrast to the better performance at the store level, significantly better performance was not recorded at the distribution center level for the items being ordered automatically compared to the items ordered manually. 