For the information security in the cyber space it is necessary to define cryptographic algorithms that enable a high degree of data and communication protection, support very high communication speeds, require extremely small pro- cessing resources and have an extremely compact implementation. These charac- teristics point to a class of sequential cryptographic algorithms, i.e. the synthesis of pseudorandom generators with the aforementioned characteristics. Having in mind the stated requirements, the aim of this work is the synthesis of a class of reliable and efficient pseudorandom generators. A class of random processes based on variable permutations is defined and the probabilistic and statistical properties of the defined class of random processes are analysed. The defined class of ran- dom processes served as a reference model for defining the class of pseudorandom generators parameterized with two pseudorandom sequences. Using probability theory, information theory and number theory, the properties of a defined class of pseudorandom generators are analysed. Sufficient conditions under which the output sequence of the defined class of pseudorandom generators has an asymp- totically uniform distribution of output symbols are derived. Correlation analysis showed that the elements of the parameterizing sequences and the output sequence are asymptotically independent and as a consequence we have that the amount of information that the element of the output sequence carries about the cur- rent internal state of the generator is asymptotically zero. Analysis of the output sequence period showed that when the parameterizing sequences are selected ap- propriately, the period of the generated output sequence becomes significantly larger than the period of the parameterizing sequences. These properties are the necessary features of cryptographic pseudorandom generators. The efficiency of the proposed construction is achieved by its compactness and selection of efficient pseudo randomly generated parametrizing sequences, for example sequences gen- erated by multiple linear shift registers. The possible applications of the proposed class of reliable pseudorandom generators are listed. 