The continuation of culture defines society. However, society is built by improving and advancing culture and knowledge. Education is the means of improving society. An integral and important part of education is the assessment of learned knowledge and gained practical skills. Of all natural and technical sciences, computer science often uses assessments to determine and evaluate the level of the students' practical skills. Education utilizes various assessment methods. Efforts to improve these methods aim to achieve accurate and objective assessment. The literature reports deprecated methods, as well as those still in use. Among them, the most common are closed question type tests and practical work reviews and assessments. Tests are useful for determining the level of knowledge. On the other hand, reviewing practical works is useful for determining the level of practical skills. Both methods can be performed manually or automatically. Automated methods require setups such that it is possible to perform them without the participation of examiners. Based on professional experience, manual student assessment is difficult to do with the required level of neutrality and accuracy, regardless of the method. As a result, it is advisable to use automated assessments. However, applying these methods for determining both the level of learned knowledge and the level of gained practical skills is challenging, because these methods are incompatible for both use cases. In the literature review, this paper explores the most common problems. The paper focuses on finding a way to provide an accurate and objective method for the assessment of the practical skills of students in a subject that involves programming. Over the four years covered by the study, two generations of students were tested with these two own solutions. One method uses an electronic multichoice test to assess student's knowledge, while the other analyses the correctness of the student's practical work. This paper gives answers to several research questions. These answers are found by examining the data gathered using these two methods to assess. The research used quantitative and qualitative methods to analyse collected data. Also, the paper covers case studies of assessment methods used to perform these assessments and collect data from the period covered by this research. Case studies elaborate on the presented assessment tools. Тhe paper explores the possibility of developing a tool that can replace the teacher in the role of examiner by automating the review and evaluation of practical works; comparing the similarity of assessment results from both assessment methods; on the usefulness of using tests to determine the level of practical skills; and on the possibility of providing an objective assessment, without the influence of examiners. The paper has discussions of analysed data and research conclusions. This study proposes a way to objectively and accurately assess the level of practical skills in subjects in the field of computer science that involve programming, at the bachelor academic level. Solutions for achieving this goal are presented. Aside from the scientific, this research also has a practical contribution. 