Wireless mesh networks (WMNs) are a new trend in wireless communications which provide greater flexibility, reliability and better network performances than standard wireless local area networks. Having in mind the growing demand for the fast and efficient data transfer as well as multimedia transmission (voice and video), the major challenges in designing WMN are increasing throughput (by introducing multi- channel multi-interfaces (MCMI) approach into the WMN), and taking into account the quality of service (QoS). To achieve the best network performances, it is necessary to define protocols and routing metrics that determine the optimal path between the source and the destination node. Since the WMN is characterized by high dynamics of the signal, especially in complex environments (from the radio coverage point of view), such as those found indoors, routing metrics that can track fast changes in propagation conditions at each link in the network, are proposed in this dissertation. The link costs of the three new metrics, powerETX (Expected Transmission Count), powerWCETT (Weighted Cumulative Expected Transmission Time) and powerMIC (Metric of Interference and Channel-switching), besides the parameters defined in the existing ETX, WCETT and MIC metrics, respectively, include the parameter that depends on the received signal level. In comparison with existing metrics, these new metrics not only provide a greater data throughput and less average end-to-end delay, but also can be realized without any additional hardware and with minimal software changes. Keeping in mind that existing channel assignment (CA) algorithms do not include QoS support in MCMI-WMNs and that the multimedia transmission can suffer from unacceptable delays, a new protocol for link layer QoS-HMCP (QoS Hybrid Multi-Channel Protocol) which introduces QoS support through EDCA (Enhanced Distributed Channel Access) mechanism, and uses the good characteristics of the hybrid CA algorithm defined by HMCP protocol for link layer, is proposed in this dissertation. Four versions of the QoS-HMCP protocols, which take into account different criteria for channel switching and procedure for medium competition, are proposed. These versions are compared with basic HMCP protocol with regards to the throughput of user data and viii Optimizacija protokola i metrika rutiranja za višekanalne višeinterfejsne bežične mesh mreže delay through the network, and the results justify introducing QoS support into the MCMI network. Finally, based on a side-by-side comparison of the proposed versions, it is concluded which version of the QoS-HMCP protocol gives the best results (the greatest throughput with the smallest delay), and for which traffic categories and network conditions. Furthermore, this dissertation makes an additional contribution by providing a detailed and systematic review of existing routing protocols, channel assignment strategies, and the routing metrics for multi-channel multi-interface WMNs.