The development of the modern network environments, their application, and the dynamics of their interoperability with other technologically different concepts, is based on the application and compatibility of different heterogeneous technologies. Such a complex network environment is constantly exposed to various operational challenges, where ensuring the security and safety of services and data represents one of the most important tasks. The constant increase in the number of users and the intensive development of new applications that require high bandwidth has defined new requirements for security systems, which are based on monitoring and effectively understanding network traffic characteristics. In the light of the increasingly intensive development in the field of cyberattacks, persistent dynamic changes in network traffic, as well as the increased heterogeneity of the used technologies and devices, the development of solutions in the field of anomaly and attack detection has become a kind of imperative. Although the available literature recognizes a large number of papers dealing with the analysis of network traffic flows for the needs of the monitoring of the performance and security aspects of networks, just a few studies are based on the procedures for generating network traffic behavior profiles, or specific communication patterns. In this sense, network behavior analysis relies on an understanding of normal or acceptable behavior patterns, which would allow for the effective detection of unusual, anomalous behavior patterns. Unlike the intrusion detection systems that are based on the packet payload or signature (signature-based), this approach is extremely useful not only for the identification of unknown threats, zero-day attacks, and suspicious behavior, but also for the improvement of the overall network performance. This dissertation proposes a new method for attacks and anomalies detection, which is based on the profiling of the network traffic that uses only IP addresses and port numbers collected via the NetFlow protocol. The proposed solution relies on a specific preprocessing of the network traffic flows by applying entropy calculation over certain attributes of the traffic flow instances. Then, by the means of the aggregation techniques, some additional attributes are calculated, reflecting the communication activity of the participants in the observed time interval - epoch. By the means of the additional transformation of the generated attributes, several characteristic signatures are formed, describing the network traffic profiles. Further, with the application of the enhanced hierarchical clustering algorithm, the traffic instances are grouped according to the defined profiles. The dissertation encompasses a comprehensive overview of the issues in the field of the detection and identification of anomalies and attacks in modern network environments and applies a systematic approach to solving the issues starting from the defined hypotheses, analyzing the characteristics of network traffic flows, and then proposing a new solution based on the combination of different techniques. It includes the pre-processing of network traffic flows, entropy calculation of attribute values, their aggregation, generation of specific network traffic profile signatures, and the application of a modified hierarchical agglomerative clustering (HAC) algorithm. The basic idea is to enable fast and efficient processing of real network environment data, in the case of working with unlabeled, incomplete, and different flow lengths. The proposed solution is based on the assumption that each data flow includes certain information and volumetric attributes, while the application of special aggregation techniques generates additional attributes, the so-called behavioral attributes. Similar to the entropy-based techniques, in this case, the aggregation is applied over each data flow, while this way preprocessed attributes are then interpreted as a separate signature of the communication flow. One of the dissertation goals is to find a method that would ensure the enhancement of the entropy-based techniques with the application of different machine learning algorithms, and it relies on the proposal of two new approaches. 