Cyber warfare is warfare in cyberspace, based on application of information communication technologies. It represents a specific form of international conflict, differing from the traditional warfare forms in means, methods and participants. Cyber warfare is applied independently from war and peace periods. It is not significantly technologically different in its techniques, methods and attack processes from criminal, espionage or terrorist activities. The potential of this, technologically based conflict form, grows with prevalence and influence of information technologies at the national and global level. International practice of cyber space conflict is real and dynamic. States allocate growing budget funds for conducting cyberspace conflict, they develop capacities and organizational structures for operations in cyberspace and adopt doctrines and strategies for their application and development. Some states declared cyberspace the fifth domain of military activities, equal with land, sea, air, and space. However, international community has got a natural tendency to regulate all conflicts, including cyber warfare. The natural way to do this is through application of the existing law of armed conflict and analogy with appropriate armed conflict situations in physical space. Despite brief period for development of doctrines, methods and means for cyberspace operations, modern scientific and professional literature is rich in papers dealing with possible ways of application of the said analogy for the purpose of regulation of cyber warfare. Special place in this literature belongs to application of law based on cyber attack effects. This approach was accepted by most international legal experts, including authors of Tallinn Manual for cyber warfare. Despite such a theoretical approach, situations and consequences of conducting cyber attacks at international level remain unresolved and unregulated in practice. States execute operations in cyberspace, using the circumstance that attacks are difficult to discover until their obvious consequences are manifested; that most often it is impossible to perform identification and attribution of attackers, i.e. to practically determine responsibility of a state for an attack and its consequences in accordance with the rules, norms and principles of International law of armed conflict. Having in mind the significance of cyber conflict and warfare in modern international relations and expected growth of their importance in line with future development of information technologies, as well as the inability of practical regulation of situations through application of traditional armed conflict law, subject matter of this dissertation is international legal regulation of conflict in cyberspace. The research objective is to determine the nature of cyber warfare and cyberspace conflict in order to propose a way to regulate it in the future. The objective was achieved during the research through analysis of conflict threats; its dominant specifics, nature, types and content; estimate of applicability of traditional law to new conflict situations in cyberspace, and building of foundation for future theoretical and practical research in the field of cyberspace conflict. Having in mind limitations stemming from technological nature of information- communication technologies and cyberspace and a fast and dynamic application of such technologies for the purpose of leading conflicts between states in cyberspace, the beginning hypothesis during research was that there was no theoretic basis for long-term prediction and consequently understanding of cyber warfare nature, as well as for its international legal regulation. Given the changeable nature of cyber warfare and conflict and the need of simultaneous and complex analyses of the research matter in the context of various scientific disciplines, such as computer, legal, military and sociological sciences, as well as the existing military theory and information security practice, a multidisciplinary and partially interdisciplinary research approach was adopted. For the purpose of providing a scientific explanation of key categories, phenomena and concepts significant for research, such as cyberspace, cyber attacks, cyber weapons, cyber warfare and cyberspace conflict, a comprehensive analysis and systematization of the existing knowledge, practice and experiences in the cyber conflict and warfare domain was performed. The goal of this procedure was synthesis of the key concepts significant for understanding the nature of cyber warfare and its international legal regulation. Research results show that cyber warfare is a technologically dependent form of conflict taking place in cyberspace which is conceptually different from all traditional forms of conflict in the physical environment. Key elements of cyberspace conflict, such as conflict means (weapons), participants and methods of warfare are in their nature significantly different from situations during traditional armed conflict. Key problems of international legal regulation of cyber warfare is frequent inability to discover cyber attacks, to perform attacker identification and attribution and determining state responsibility for attacks. These problems originate in technological nature and therefore, cannot be efficiently resolved by exclusive legal regulation, without application of suitable technological solutions. In some domains, such as performing cyber attacks with direct participation of people outside of public and closed computer information networks, key activities for law application cannot be practically achieved. The dissertation offers a comprehensive analysis of a large number of relevant sources of notions, definitions and concepts, based on which key characteristics of cyberspace and conflicts within cyberspace are determined. According to the analysis results, cyberspace is an environment where data and information is created, kept, processed, exchanged and destroyed by application of computer systems characterized by existence or possibility of establishing systems, processes and people network at the level of data. This dissertation especially covers the problems of application of traditional International Law of Armed Conflict to conflicts in cyberspace, analyses key notions, concepts and phenomena important for cyber warfare between states and offers a proposal as a consequence of determined research results relating to future behavior of states for the purpose of building capabilities for cyber defense from cyberspace attacks and international legal action in future regulation of cyberspace conflicts. Unlike traditional conflicts in physical environment representing organized application of exclusive and specific armament, i.e. means for conduct of conflict, cyber warfare is a process, not use of „cyber weapons“. This process represents intentional violation of information security of an attacked system in cyberspace for the military purposes. In general, every cyber attack process consists of discovery of targeted system's vulnerability, determining its nature, utilization of vulnerability for unauthorized access to the system and execution of attack. This process primarily depends on computer systems technology and information security, not military skill and practice. However, regardless of the fact that soldiers need not conduct the attack, that there is no application of specific, military armament, and that it can be conducted both during peace and war, or within or outside of a political conflict context, covertly, postponed and decentralized, cyber attacks have the potential to achieve significant military effects and goals at tactical, operational and strategic level. Having in mind the specific, technologically based nature of cyber warfare, it should be understood in the widest context, not as a conflict in the state of war or a military activity during military operations in the physical environment, but as a large number of possible activities taking place at the physical, logical and cognitive level of cyberspace. Logical level of cyberspace, based on logical-mathematical rules and instructions is the basis of cyberspace, connecting its influence on the living and non-living world in the physical environment through data, computer systems processing them and meaning of information carried in those data. Wide application of information-communication technologies in cyberspace for the purpose of leading conflicts at international level is a consequence of their increasing incidence in all segments of human life and work. Whereas the same technologies and principles of their work are applied both in peace time and military environment. This fact, not the scope and content of cyberspace conflict effects, promises development of this type of conflict and warfare in the future and gives them capability for fast development and changing of form, use and consequences. The goal of this dissertation is in identification of cyber conflict and warfare nature, their sources and relations between military, international legal, social and information security practice. This goal provides the practical contribution of the dissertation, reflected in conclusions of its research. One of the conclusions is that cyber warfare application has a future, primarily depending on development of information communication technologies, not the capability of international community to legally regulate cyberspace conflicts in a traditional way. Other conclusions relate to ways of cyber warfare capacity building at national level, as well as to the only possible direction for cyber conflict practical regulation at international level. Dissertation points out that the bases for building a national cyber defense system are not in possessing and application of technical systems for conducting operations in cyberspace, but in managing specific knowledge in the field of applied information security in cyberspace at national level. Also, it is determined that international legal regulation of cyber warfare is not possible through exclusive application of traditional International Law of Armed Conflict, not even through building of new legal; systems, if they are based only on traditional legal solutions, without simultaneous inclusion and application of technological solutions on the basic level of modern information communication technologies. Conclusion of analysis is that development of new technologies will quickly bring about development of new cyber warfare capabilities. The dissertation offers a conclusion that the only way of practical cyber warfare regulation at international level, and at the same time limitation of its negative consequences, is contained in the possible bilateral and multilateral collaboration of interested parties in international community. Conflicts in cyberspace do not take place only during state of war, and not only through application of military offensive operations, so the solution for their regulation cannot be found exclusively in International Law of Armed Conflict, but be a part of a comprehensive approach encompassing many possibilities and activities of military and peacetime exercise of national power. Solution for limiting cyber conflicts lies in the combined application of diplomatic, political, economic, military, legal, information and other efforts and activities.