In doctoral thesis “Brand management model in purpose of establishing long term customer relationship” relevant models have been presented that companies use for successful brand management and customer portfolio management, as well as possibility of brand management integration and long term customer relationship management. At the very beginning of thesis, the overview of chapters is provided, in which in short the content of each is presented. In the second chapter, term and history of brand is presented with specific view on brand architecture and brand knowledge. Also, subject of this chapter is brand management process with special emphasis on brand resonance model, with explanation of brand value terms, added value and brand financial value. Relationship management is subject of the third chapter, where relationship management is defined as well as subject of CRM data base and Payne model of customer relationship management. In third chapter subject of Customer relationship management models, segmentation, sub-segmentation and categorization in CRM, are discussed. Fourth chapter is focused upon relationship management between company and customers, and models of mentioned relationships. Fifth chapter develops concrete brand management model in purpose of establishing long term customer relationship, with special view on branding model based on customer perspective and brand and customer relationship model Suzanne Fernie. In this chapter terms such as loyalty and customer satisfaction are discussed. In the sixth chapter, points of integration between brand management model and long term customer relationship management are defined, with detailed analysis and comparison of both concepts, with special accent on segmentation process and customer categorization, that represent introduction in completely new term “relationship branding”. In the final part of chapter integral model is presented. This part of chapter research results and hypothesis tests are presented, with final views on science contribution of thesis and its implication on managers, as well as further possible research directions. The used references and dissertation contributions are given at the end of paper.