After conducting the literature overview and completing the related research, it is established that only a limited number of organizations has managed to systematically identify and transfer project knowledge to future projects, as well that project performances are intensively related to certain elements of knowledge. In addition, we can also conclude that knowledge is created through the learning process in each project, as well as that project knowledge management needs to be integrated with other project management processes. The main causes of inefficient project management in project environment are: the fact that organizations are more focused on the task at hand than on the learning process, inadequate analysis of project success and the process of filing project results. Having in mind the insufficiently developed scientific support for using project result analysis and project success results, this doctoral dissertation focuses on analyzing project success and examining the influence of the results of project success analysis on knowledge management in project environment. The dissertation also features the synthesis and overview of theoretical basis for the project success analysis concept, as well as an empirical research that leads to the establishing of an integrated concept for measuring and analyzing project success. The empirical research was conducted in Serbia, on a sample of organizations focused on project management. The research proved that there is a significant connection between the way in which knowledge is gathered and transferred from previous projects and the way in which we define project success and file project success results. The research results also confirms the main hypothesis: Project success analysis based on measuring project performances, if conducted systematically, contributes to the effective and efficient knowledge management in project environment. If we take a look at research results, it is possible to establish a systematic approach to project success analysis, based on the relation between the said elements and the need for their formalization. The concept presented here was implemented in a project focusing on information systems and technologies. In addition, the dissertation also presents advantages and disadvantages this concept offers by analyzing the said project.