 Dissertation under the title of Problems of Assessing Value of Small and Me- dium Enterprises in Diff erent Life Cycle Stages gave signifi cant contribu- tion regarding methodic-methodological sense of connecting two unexplored phenomena of business economy. Subject and goal of the research were em- phasized in the INTRODUCTION of this work, as well as problem, hypothe- sis, methodology and expected contribution of research. In the fi rst part of the work, titled THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK: OVERVIEW OF CURRENT RE- SEARCHES IN THE FIELD OF INTERACTIONS OF DEVELOPMENT STAGES AND ASSESSING VALUE OF SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES, the im- portance of small and medium enterprises for the country economy develop- ment was pointed out, especially in the case of countries in transitional and post- transitional period, that is characterized by fusions, reengineering, restructuring and downsizing. Th ese contemporary challenges of business environment can be addressed with appropriate small and medium enterprise development policy. Awareness that a diff erent stage of enterprise development is characterized by diff erent problems, is determining the necessity of examining its infl uence on enterprise value. In order to connect these two fi elds in an adequate manner which would enable their examination, systematization of methodical concepts and methodologies of value assessment of small and medium enterprises and diagnosing of development stage of small and medium enterprise was performed separately within the methodological framework. Methodical concepts of value assessment of small and medium enterprises include methods and methodology of value assessment of small and medium enterprises. Following methods were used for the needs of this paper: method of assessing the book value, method of yielding value and method of determining the liquidation value. Methodology consists of three phases: preparation, implemental and closing phase. Methodical concepts of diagnosis of development of small and medium enterprises include models and methodology for diagnosis of development of small and medium enterprises. Models used for the purposes of this paper are models for determining change of metamorphosis, models for determining of behavioral change and models of determining structural change. Methodology consists of three phases: development management, development diagnosis and directing of develop- ment. Th e second part of paper titled Methodological Framework: Overview of Current Methodology in the Field of Interaction of Development and Value As- sessing of Small and Medium Enterprises addresses the choice of methodological framework. By applying St.Gallen methodology, methodological framework of small and medium enterprise development gives an successive overview of four standard ideal models of development with proposed criteria. For the sample of 55 small and medium enterprises, it was determined weather they belong to one of four phases. Fift een enterprises were excluded from mentioned sample, because it was not possible to determine which phase they belong. Remaining 40 enterprises were placed in four ideal standard phases, so that every phase is consisted of 10 small and medium enterprises. Book, yielding and liquidation value has been assessed and determined for each enterprise. Aft er this, based on synthetic and analytic evaluation of small and medium enterprise performance has been evaluated using Klariceks DF and Belaks BEX models and predicted fu- ture using Klarickes Quick Test model. In third part of the work, titled: APPLI- CATIVE FRAMEWORK: OVERVIEW OF CURRENT RESEARCH IN THE FIELD OF INTERACTION OF DEVELOPMENT PHASES AND ASSESSING VALUE OF SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES, hypothesizes were tested, particularly central hypothesis and four auxiliary hypotheses. In this part, valid- ity of interaction of development phases and selection of proposed methodology were discussed. In the CONCLUSION, synthesis of the research was presented, along with the most important fi ndings of the work and recommendations and guidelines for the future research.