The  reform  of  the  primary  education  system  in  Serbia  and   Yugoslavia in the period from 1944 to 1959, i.e. from the end of the Second World   War to the adoption of the General Law on Education in 1958 by which the uniform   eight-grade primary school was established throughout the country, the one which still   exists in Serbia, represents the result of the “struggle for school” which had started in   the Serbian society at the end of the 19th century. As such, it is inseparable from the   struggle for the modernization and democratization of both Serbian and Yugoslavian   society in the 20th century. The reform of the primary education system in Serbia and   Yugoslavia  which  resulted  in  the  establishment  of  the  uniform  eight-grade  primary   school in 1958 was a part of the struggle for “new school”. It could be noted that the   intensive work on defining new education and upbringing polices and the initiation of   new reforms of the existing systems of education started immediately after the Second   World War, primarily due to the activities of the UN organization, of the UNESCO to   be  more  precise.  The  continuation  of  the  struggle  for  the  “new”  school  which  was   interrupted by the world wars was particularly encouraged by the “new” discovery of   childhood which had suffered some serious loss during the Second World War. The   reform of the primary education system in the period from 1944 to 1959 represented a   part of the struggle for the cultural transformation of the society which revolutionary,   communist  government  of  Yugoslavia  started  when  the  first  organs  of  government   were  established.  The  path  towards  better  and  more  fair,  i.e.  socialist,  society  led   through political stabilization of the country which could not be accomplished without   economic recovery or, as it was often pointed out, “overall progress of the society”,   which also included “cultural life”. “Cultural life”, including “educational life” as its   integral part, was thus considered to be an integral part of the “socialist transformation   of  the  society”  from  the  very  beginning.  The  conclusions  adopted  at  the  Fifth   Congress  of  the  CPY  (1948)  had  far-reaching  consequences  on  both  the  country’s   cultural  policy  and  the  education  and  upbringing  policy  since  it  received  its  main   guidelines  with  the  Resolution  of  the  Third  Plenary  Session  of  the  CC  of  the  CPY   which was adopted in December 1949. All state institutions, schools above all, were   to  give  ground  to  the  new  education  and  upbringing  policy  and  to  seek  help  in  the struggle  for  the  man  of  socialism.  School  had  to  rely  on  a  complex  system  of  mass   organizations,  with  the  Pioneer  Organization  as  the  most  prominent  one,  and  on   “reliable”  party  cadre,  on  a  large  number  of  experts  in  the  field  of  psychology,   pedagogy,  film,  arts,  literature  and  music  who  were  gathered  around  the  Council  of   Societies  for  Child  and  Youth  Care  of  Yugoslavia  and  on  the  millions  of  parents   “neglected”  in  the  previous  century  who  had  to  play  their  role  in  the  building  of   socialism, just like other citizens of the socialist community. In this way, the “new”   education  policy  helped  create  the  idea  of  school  as  the  starting  point  of  the   modernization of society or cultural revolution and building of socialism.