The global crisis has had a direct impact on all countries in transition, so it did on our country too, with the consequences such as investments reduction, the withdrawal of foreign investors, the growth of debts. The banking sector in Bosnia and Herzegovina, although it records the growth of non-performing loans, has resisted the greater consequences of the economic crisis, partly because of the conservative policy , thus it does not need to take risks because the existing mode of business brings profit. Also, an analysis of stock exchange business operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been done in the observed period and the phases from the establishment, development, and then to the decline of turnover, which is not only a consequence of the economic crisis, but also a combination of internal factors. The banking sector is the most important part of the overall financial system, which is largely privatised with the dominance of foreign private capital, where deposits are the main sources of business operations and a loan is the basic product. Given that the loan, in the practice so far, is used as the most common form of placement of funds and has a dominant role in the overall banking business, the credit risk is a problem in cash flows and poses a problem in the bank's liquidity, which is partly the subject of the thesis. In order to preserve a quality loan portfolio, the bank management defines a clear loan policy that maximizes profitability within the acceptable risk framework for the bank. The thesis is dealing with the study of non-performing loans dynamics in Republika Srpska, which is based on the data contained in the reports of the Banking Agency of Republika Srpska for 2009 – 2016 period. The objectives of this study were: testing econometric theory, providing empirically based results and predicting future values. Considering the character, development and the current economic conditions of business operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina (underdeveloped capital markets, inadequate legal regulations for realisation and collection of collaterals, the dominant participation of credit operations in the overall banking sector’s business operations), the greatest attention in the controlling of banking sector operations is paid to credit risk control, liquidity risk and foreign exchange risk. Due to the lack of market for the largest number of asset items, sophisticated market assessments are still not applicable. The interest of foreign investors for the banking market in the countries of the region occurs in the early 2000s. Some of the factors that influenced foreign investors to enter the banking sector of the region were: developed financial and credit markets, level of gross domestic product, low inflation rate, economic growth and productivity. The key role in the arrival of foreign investors was the achievement of returns, so they decided to enter these markets and achieved dominance and greater competitiveness. German, Austrian, Italian and French banks showed the greatest interest in these markets. The arrival of foreign banks in the banking sector of the region has resulted in the expected benefits such as the introduction of new technologies and innovations, improving competitiveness and infrastructure, as well as the arrival of foreign investors. Banks with majority foreign capital operated better than local banks because they provided better service. 