The subject research of the solar attack consequences carried out in order to prepare this dissertation has shown that the most advanced electric power system (EPS) protection systems can not provide adequate protection against higher intensity solar storms. The weakening of the Earth's magnetosphere, the 2003 Solar storm in South Africa (of similar latitude to Serbia), the weakening of the Venezuelan EPS in 2019 by the United States of America (USA) aimed at destabilizing the state, as well as the complex security position of Serbia - are the elements that gave rise to the need for drafting a strategic restructuring proposal of the Serbian Electric Power Company in a short period of time in order to increase its resistance. The massive floods of May 2014 that disabled the Thermal Power Plant (TPP) "Kolubara" and TPP "Nikola Tesla A" for a long period of time have confirmed the existence of risks to the normal functioning of the Serbian EPS from natural disasters just as well. An extensive study of the EPS collapse indicates that the concept of a smaller number of major electrical energy (EE) producers has its weak link in the EE transmission system to the consumers, i.e. that the saturation of high voltage transformers can paralyze the entire EPS for a period of 12 to 16 months (according to Lloyd's report). In South Africa, some EPS segments only became operational after four years. A threat to normal functioning of the economy, followed by huge social unrest and chaos all precisely aimed at destroying a state security system and comprise ever increasingly used hybrid warfare. The subject research of the published papers from Serbia demonstrated that the Serbian EPS is up- to-date and moving towards transfer from a smaller number of TPP to a larger number of producers from renewable energy sources (RES) by 2030. It is very important that Serbia does not allow itself a transparent weakness, considering its complex security status in the Balkans. This dissertation gave a new “stand by” concept of creating energy independent communes (within an existing EPS) that will rely on the strong development of neglected industrial energy. Only large production companies can quickly upgrade their spare EE power supply systems, rearranging their thermal blocks into small thermal power plants and transforming a local distribution network into an independent virtual network with its proper EE manufacturers that will be the bearers of energy independent local administrative units. Research on changes in the level of awareness of managers in the Serbian economy, related to the solar storms of 2017 and 2018 (before and following the announcement in all media), indicated a need for applying a new Model for creating energy-independent companies for the rapid implementation of the concept of energy independent communes. The entire process' bases are the leading companies' senior managers, their excellence and power position combined with memetics and crony capitalism are the model's operational mechanism. The functionality of the model was proven by the hypothesis and the fourth survey conducted among senior management in Serbia. This dissertation also provided practical solutions for protection from solar proton events and pointed to insufficient research on health problems caused by solar storms in Serbia. 