The Republic of Serbia is taking the largest part in the process of joining the European Union European acquis and built the system and transposed and harmonized national technical legislation with EU legislation. In area waste management has achieved a good level of compliance with the main EU directives in the field of waste. However, the practical application and implementation in practice is at an early stage, although some progress has been made in collecting utilities waste and sanitary disposal of waste in landfills. Waste management is one of the main responsibilities of the state, and the basic goal of the management program solid waste minimizes environmental pollution as well as use waste as a resource. European Union regulations in the field of environmental protection are detailed, concrete and comprehensive, but still flexible enough for Member States in terms of adapting the manner of implementation to the constitutional and institutional order. The existing infrastructure in the field of hazardous waste treatment in Serbia is unprepared for the application of the requirements of the directives based on the New and Global approach to the EU. Development and adaptation of methods and new technologies and construction of plants for the application of new technologies in the treatment of special species Hazardous waste as well as professional training is a long and expensive process. Because it is necessary, at the national level, to engage all available capacities, which can contribute to the harmonization and implementation of protection legislation environment and waste management, which will contribute to human health and economic development, and at the same time the needs will be met present and future generations. State of the hazardous waste management system on the territory of the Republic of Serbia indicates the complete absence of any type of hazardous waste treatment and location Due to the above problems, this paper was written in order to offer one of the solutions for the disposal and complete destruction of hazardous waste, which is now historic in many companies in the Republic of Serbia. The treatment of hazardous waste in this plant will be based on the disposal of PCB oil, Ni-Cd batteries, biodegradable waste, etc. The paper describes the current situation with hazardous waste and the legal regulations that accompany it, provides a solution and methodological procedure on how plasma technology can achieve total waste disposal and energy to be converted into heat and electricity, also a complete business model of consumption that would had a profitable structure. 