This paper proposes novel method for detecting students’ attention by utilizing Internet of Things and machine learning algorithms. The main hypotesis that has been proven in this PhD thesis is that utilization of the Internet of Things in the education can increase teaching efficiency by implementing system for detecting students’ attention that enables environmental parameters analysis and presentation of processed results. In order to provide further insight required for realization of above mentioned processes as well as to justify the need for performing featuring study, a survey on relevant computer and social science researches is done. The survey includes comparative analysis of smart classroom platforms that represents a medium for these new algorithms to rise and identificate sociological contexts in a moment of appearance. The sociological sciences are very important as they help us understand a background of sociological processes being monitored and classified; thus survey of sociological sciences and social signals above all are given to finalize a survey of relevant researches and inline a direction of further realization of the proposed system. In addition, survey has also inlined potential parameters and algorithms that can be used, followed with a methodology description for all phases of the research. Then, requirements of such system are analyzed and important features required for detection identified as well as sociological factors that influence these features. Pattern classification is done by levaraging a machine learning method that requires classificator based on a certain dataset. Before implementation, system simulation is done on a dataset which is not used in the process of training. During simulation system have shown avarage accuracy of 92.2%. After the simulation, the system was implemented and its performance evaluated by comparing a real-time annotator (i.e. the students’ feedback) with the system output during the lectures. The average accuracy of the system evaluated for three different groups of students was 81.9%.