In this dissertation a novel system for visual representation of cryptographic algorithms (CryptOgraphic Algorithms visuaL simulAtion – COALA) is presented. The main goal of the developed system is to help students who are new to the field of data security to easier and better understand the material that covers cryptographic algorithms, which represents the foundation on which the more complex topics rely on. At the School of Electrical Engineering, University of Belgrade there is a course called Data Security that covers topics from cryptographic algorithms, through security protocols and applications, to system security. By following student’s results on the exam it was noticed that students tend to have problems to cope with the material covering the field of cryptographic algorithms, which later had negative impact on their overall success on the exam. After analyzing the reasons that lead to the described situation, the conclusion was drawn that the introduction of a system for visual representation of cryptographic algorithms within the laboratory exercises in the course might be a solution to the problem. Usage of similar systems is quite usual at courses that teach software related areas in the field of computer engineering and information systems. Before a new system was developed an analysis of existing solutions in the field was made in order to determine whether a system that covers the needs of the Data Security course already exists and to define which characteristics should such system have in order to be successfully used as an educational aid. It was found that even though there is a large number of systems for visual representation of algorithms (AV systems), there is only a small number of systems that can be used for visual representation of cryptographic algorithm and none of these systems fully covers the needs of the Data Security course. Based on the systematization of the existing systems for visual representation of algorithms with special attention on those that can be used for visual representation of cryptographic algorithms a methodology for the development of such system is proposed. By analysis of the literature that is concerned with the eLearning tools an efficient way of using the developed system in education process is defined. The developed system enables detailed analysis of the execution of all cryptographic algorithms that are explained at the lecture classes and the problems classes. It presents all details of the execution of supported algorithms, where it is significant for understanding the system works with real world lengths of the algorithm parameters, and all input parameters in the algorithms are configurable in order to make it possible to easily and quickly show execution of algorithms on different examples. As a part of the dissertation, several overviews were made: an overview of the eLearning tools field, an overview of the field covering systems for visual representation of algorithms (AV systems), and an overview of the field concerned with systems for visual representation of cryptographic algorithms. The description of cryptographic algorithms that are supported in the COALA system is presented. The system supports five different types of cryptographic algorithms: substitution algorithms (Caesar, monoalphabetic, Playfair, and Vigenere algorithms), transposition algorithms (Rail Fence and Row Transposition algorithms), production algorithms (Rotor Machine), symmetric block algorithms (DES and AES), and public-key algorithms (Diffie-Hellman and RSA). Special emphasis is placed on the explanation of details about the visual representation used in the COALA system. The detailed functional description and details about software implementation of the COALA system are presented in the dissertation.