Parallel knowledge tests are tests which contain different sets of items (sets of questions or assignments of different types) with approximately equal measurement properties, that make them interchangeable. They are applicable when more examinees are solving the test, regardless of whether they do it at the same time or at different times. The results of the testing must be comparable. Automation of the parallel test assembly process is practically necessary in order to achieve objectivity of the testing by well balancing the measurement properties of different test forms and to reduce the possibility of subjective errors by the examiner. Also, the more massive the testing, the more significant is saving up the invested examiner’s time for preparation of parallel tests, by automation of assembly process. Since the automated parallel test assembly problem (APTA) belongs to NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems, the use of heuristics is expected and necessary. The APTA problem is isomorphic with some existing combinatorial optimization problems, therefore heuristics for solving those problems can also be used for solving the APTA problem. In the dissertation an extensive review of the existing formulations of this problem is presented, its mathematical models, then an overview of the heuristics used for solving different problem formulations. Firstly, formulations of the problem and heuristic solutions are independently classified, then their cross- classification pointed to an open space for exploration through new combinations of formulations of the problem and heuristics for their solving. The heuristics used to solve ASPT problems are mainly improvement heuristics, where the execution is interrupted either when a predetermined execution time occurs or when the desired quality of the solution is reached. Constructive heuristics are mainly used to create an initial solution for improvement heuristics. The focus of this dissertation is on the proposal of a new efficient method of polynomial complexity for the complete solving the APTA problem. The proposed method solves one formulation of the bin packing problem by adapting the constructive heuristic proposed by Nawaz, Enschore and Ham, which has not been used for solving the APTA problem so far. Among the characteristics of the new method, predictable execution time, efficiency and simplicity of implementation stand out. Predictable time and efficient tests assembly is of special importance in educational institutions where frequent testing of a relatively small number of examinees is performed, and where the available computer resources for ASPT are limited. The proposed APTA method has been implemented and compared to the efficient comparable methods based on improvement heuristics, such as simulated annealing (SA) and variable neighbourhood search (VNS). In open literature, the VNS method gives the results of the best quality for the APTA problem formulated as the bin packing problem. The execution time of the proposed algorithm is significantly shorter compared to the SA algorithm, while the quality is negligibly worse. Compared to the VNS algorithm, the average execution time is significally shorter, while for the same execution time (achieved by interrupting the execution of the VNS algorithm), the proposed new algorithm achieves a better quality of result for the case of a relatively small number of parallel tests (20, 30 and 60) and relatively small item banks (300 items), which are often found in knowledge tests in education institutions.