The research presented in this dissertation is finding of fuzzy functional dependencies in the fuzzy relational database models. The goal is reviewing and analyzing of recent results in this field and developing our own algorithm for identification of dependencies between attributes in the fuzzy relations based on fuzzy implication in fuzzy logic. The problem of fuzzy functional dependency analzsing in fuzzy relational database models is not recent. In this area there is a significant number of papers and authors dealt with mentioned issue in the last two decades. However, literature analysis showed that there is no algorithm that would enable the identification of attribute relationships in relational schemas. This restriction was the motive for the development of our metodology in the analysis of fuzzy functional dependencies over a given set of attributes. Solving this, not so new problem, is not only research challenge having theoretical importance, but it also has practical significance. Implementation of logical database models provided by the previous theory and integration to other areas and fields (GIS, Rudarenje podataka, Information Retrieval, reducing data redundansy,estimation of NULL values...) are crucial aims in this paper. The initial assumption was that the theory of fuzzy sets and particular fragment of fuzzy logic are the perfect solution when database managers can’t unambiguously determine the relationships between data and attributes within the relation. In the field of artificial intelligence, fuzzy sets and fuzzy logic are studied in terms of fuzzy relational database design within the intelligent systems because fuzzy set theory and fuzzy logic are powerful tools for manipulating and representing imprecise and uncertain information. Finding potential dependencies between attributes in fuzzy relations is actually rudarenje podataka technique related to hidden and useful knowledge used for decision making. This dissertation presents a new technique for identification of existing dependencies between pairs of tuples using different fuzzy implications which characterization is described by author. Fuzzy implications meeting established acceptance criteria are used for estimation of linguistic strength θ when fuzzy functional  dependency X  Y is satisfied. For demonstration of proposed methodology and research verification we performed experiment on real data under two different models: fuzzy database model based on proximity relation and fuzzy database model with possibility distribution. Discovering potential dependencies between attributes of the observed fuzzy relation actually represents a discovery of hidden and useful knowledge, i.e. a rudarenje podataka technique. In order to identify fuzzy functional dependency within the corresponding fuzzy model, following is necessary: 1. Preparing the data for the analysis (preprocessing, data summarization, data warehousing etc.). 2. Finding subrelations (n-tuples) on the observed attributes with potentially hidden fuzzy functional dependencies. 3. Associating fuzzy functional dependencies with corresponding fuzzy implications. 5 4. Interpreting search results for the purpose of getting the final set of fuzzy dependencies. From a practical point of view, in search of fuzzy functional dependencies within fuzzy database models through application of the proposed methodology, it is necessary to conduct efficiency analysis as well. Main shortcoming that may appear is the total number of transactions (possible pairs of tuples with associated values) that needs to be computed, which can be very expensive for large databases. Increase of the number of tuples, as well as the number of attributes of relational scheme, exponentially increases the number of tuples. However, in this PhD thesis we propose and show that increase of algorithm's efficiency is possible, as well as decrease of the number of computed transactions. However, we would like to note that the nature of the observed problem determines efficiency of the algorithm. There are databases where compression is not neccesary, while in other cases, when we are talking about huge databases, a variety of techniques are proposed for the relation reduction such as data summarization based on fuzzification [], cluster formation, granulation, presenting a number of similar tuples with one representing tupe etc. Generally, our research shows us how to extract intelligent information from fuzzy relational databases. In order to identify possible relations between attributes of fuzzy relation, we must firstly prepare the data for the analysis i.e. create a table with pairs of tuples and conformance values on all attributes of original relation. Next step is to find sub-relations where criteria for the existence of fuzzy dependencies were met. Third step is to associate fuzzy functional dependencies with corresponding fuzzy implications. Finally, we interpret the results of previous steps in order to get the final set of fuzzy functional dependencies. The most important contribution of this dissertation is characterization of the theory of fuzzy sets and fuzzy implications in the context of developing tools and algorithms that facilitate identification of relations between attributes in the observed relational schemes. It should be pointed out that this paper represents an empirical study and a “proof-of- concept”, without developed commercial software. Moreover, we discussed certain practical cases where this methodology can be suitable. Our experiments suggest that results provided by algorithm are acceptable. As a future work we plan to employ this research in different scenariosand applications involving this methodolog such as: estimating null values in relational databases, text mining, extraction dependencies from practical knowledge databeses etc.