Security in cloud computing is a complex and multidimensional problem that is in contact with a number of areas such as security of computer networks, computer security, information security, the implementation of legal regulations, and more. Unfortunately it is also one of the main reasons why cloud computing, according to it extraordinary advantages, is not used to the extent it could. One of the safest ways to preserve the data in the cloud is certainly the application of cryptographic methods. Security of ciphertext which is kept in the cloud depends only on the security of applied cryptographic algorithms and security of keys. Unfortunately, safekeeping data on the cloud in the form of ciphertext has the disadvantage that is reflected in the inability to process these data within the cloud without their decryption which is a security risk. As one possible solution to this problem is use of homorphic cryptosystems. Their ability to allow processing of data in an crypted form and that the result of this treatment is also in an crypted format that can decrypt only one who has the keys represents, according to some authors, the holy grail of cryptography. The academic community lately is making great efforts in the research and improvement of encryption methods that allows the processing of ciphertext in the cloud. Following these trends, we noticed that the relationship between the encryption method applied to the cloud and systems with limited computing resources are little explored and that there are significant potential of its application in everyday life. Guided by these positions in the dissertation, we have examined and show the manner in which using homorphic encryption one can in a very safe way take advantage of the application which enables the cloud. In the introduction to the thesis we presents the basic ideas that have motivated research on the topic of the dissertation. We define hypotheses of scientific research, methods that will be use and the listed course of research work together with the expected scientific contribution.  The second chapter deals with cloud computing. Through over allegations literature it shows the historical development of cloud computing and data relating to the definition of cloud computing while in the third chapter explains the concept and with the help of mathematical tools homomorphism defined in the cipher systems. The fourth chapter deals with the problems of increasing the level of security of encryption keys by using virtual file system. During the practical implementation of the cipher system problem of storage and application of encryption keys is very important. During the research we came up with the idea that the encryption keys are stored on the Smart Card devices. The author has implemented this solution in the Unix/Linux operating systems, and it is practically applied in the study. The fifth chapter lists the most important scientific contribution of the dissertation. Details the problem which is observed whereby the modeling of the problem and propose a experiment like its simpler model. It describes the implementation of the proposed solutions, which in this case is realized on two different platforms, devices with limited resources, industrial computer Raspberyy Pi and Android mobile phones. Based on these results it may be seen what are constraints in terms of the length of the applied keys, the number of monitored sensor and length results found corrective function of the proposed model. During the chapters there are some parts of the developed code for the Unix/Linux operating system and the Android operating system used for experiment. In conclusion, the thesis presents basic scientific contributes and provides guidelines for possible further research in this area. 