Human-computer interaction research involves an approach that is based on multiple scientific disciplines and fields, such as computer science, psychology, sociology, cognitive sciences, design, etc. The modern interfaces through which the interaction takes place allow the use of a large number of different sensors (mouse, keyboard, gaze (eyetracker) monitor, electroencephalography (EEG), pulse monitor, heart rate, etc.). The subject of this research is human-computer interaction, that is, the ability to apply artificial intelligence to its analysis and assessment of respondents' cognitive performance. Due to the speed of data analysis that far exceeds the processing capabilities of humans, this system is able to send feedback to the user in real time, thereby becoming an active participant in the interaction. The possibility of developing an artificial intelligence model for collecting and analyzing human-computer interaction data was demonstrated on the example of four cognitive performance assessments of subjects through neuropsychological tests - Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WSCT), Visual Short Term Working Memory Test (VSTWMT), mTutor Test and the AC Test. A separate client application was developed for each individual experiment, with the ability to connect to sensor applications via the Synchronization Platform (HCI-MAP). Three sensors were used to collect human-computer interaction data: an EEG device, a eye tracking device, and a computer mouse. In order to allow for aggregation and subsequent joint processing of data on the entire interaction, independent sensor applications have been written to communicate with the EEG and the eye tracking device. The results of our research related to the achievement of participants on the computer version of WCS test show a certain deviation from the reference values in the number of achieved categories in our participant group. There is, also, a significant deviation of the results of the participant results with respect to the reference values in the number of attempts to achieve the first category. Further, the number of perseverative responses of our participants is below the normative values, but there are no significant discrepancies in errors in maintaining set. Visual short-term memory (VSTM) is defined as the ability to remember a small amount of visual information, such as colors and shapes, during a short period of time. VSTM is a part of short-term memory, which can hold information up to 30 seconds. The experiment was 4 conducted through two measurement sessions. In the first session, the respondents were in an isolated environment and in the second in the presence of the audience. The classification of the EEG data was done by using four algorithms: Naive Bayes, Support Vector, KNN, and Random Forest. The results show that we were able to correctly classify the order of the images presented 90.12% of the time and type of the displayed image 90.51% of the time. The aim of the experiment with electronic assesment through the mTuror platform was to find a model for the application of artificial intelligence that would allow the electronic assessment of knowledge to reflect as much as possible the real knowledge of the respondents. Although no strong correlation was found between any individual parameter and response accuracy, it can be concluded that it is possible to influence the emotional state of the subjects by inserting a particular type of questions. Thus, stress can be reduced by inserting a fun question with an obvious correct answer. Interest can be increased by using easy questions, and student focus can be restored by using impossible questions, without correct answer. The AC test is used to assess the degree of attention, that is, the ability to highlight important stimuli in relation to distracting stimuli. The high level of correlation between the gaze position and the mouse cursor position provides an opportunity to approximate the interaction of one sensor with the help of the analyzed data from the other. By comparing the gaze data with the mouse movement data, it can be concluded that, in the case of the AC test, the existing level of correlation is high, especially at the letter coordinates that the subject crossed out. The overall conclusion of the conducted research is that it is possible to use artificial intelligence to analyze human-computer interaction, and that its application will produce close or better results than those in which human analysis is performed. Distributed solutions can be implemented to synchronize and provide real-time feedback from the system. An automated analysis conducted by artificial intelligence can assess the cognitive performance of users.