More and more organizations extend their operations to global market. Globalization and growth of international business have led to more extensive internationalization of human resource management. Nowadays it has been widely recognized that effective human resource management is a key of success of multinational companies. The doctoral dissertation addresses issues that multinational companies have been faced with in managing diverse human resources in international context. The dissertation defines and explains the basic issues of international human resource management, as well as core activities of international human resource management, primarily those related to staffing and performance management. While doing business in different countries, multinational companies are being faced with various challenges. One of the most critical decisions that a multinational company has to make is the one concerning standardization of human resource management activities. Multinational companies often need to adjust their human resource management policies, practices and procedures to specific environment in foreign countries where they perform their operations. The aim of this doctoral dissertation is to reveal in which way multinational companies perform activities of staffing and performance management and to which extent they tend to standardize human resource management policies and practices in headquarters and various subsidiaries worldwide, i.e. to which extent they succeed in transferring those policies and practices from headquarters to foreign subsidiaries. The dissertation includes a review of literature on international human resource management and the results of research focused on standardization of human resource management practices in multinational companies. The dissertation includes empirical research conducted in subsidiaries of foreign multinational companies in Serbia, with an aim to determine the extent to which multinational companies standardize their human resource management policies and practices in their subsidiaries in Serbia, as well as to identify variables which predominantly influence the possibility of transferring those policies and practices from headquarters to foreign subsidiaries. The findings from analysis of data collected through the survey conducted in subsidiaries of multinational companies in Serbia showed that the surveyed companies mostly standardize their human resource management policies and practices, as well as performance management practices, but not staffing practices. Based on the results of the research a new approach to human resource management was proposed, aiming to enable multinational companies to make the best possible decision on the extent to which they want to harmonize their human resource management policies and practices with the practices in headquarters, or to adjust them to the Serbian local practices.