The subject of the dissertation is the possibility of developing process performance measurement model that is flexible and adaptable. Since a contemporary management of the organization involves management of its processes, the achievement of organization’s goals depends on the success of its processes. The success of the process is measured by using key performance indicators. Part of the research is related to the analysis of the interdependencies of the highest level of organization’s goals and process performance indicators in companies that implemented a process approach. Research of possibilities and ways to increase the flexibility and adaptability of the process performance measurement system includes a description and analysis of the known performance measurement models and development of an authentic model that would be flexible and adaptable. Development involves model definition (elements of structure, links and interdependencies), its application in practice and its improvement, on a basis of achieved results. Main hypothesis developed and proved in the dissertation is: Formalization of interdependencies of the highest level of organization’s goals and key process performance indicators, makes it possible to improve the flexibility and adaptability of the business performance measurement systems. Based on analysis of the extensive literature, the scientific description and comparative analysis of existing process performance measurement models was conducted. Afterwards, the new GPI (G - Goal; P - process; I - Indicator) model is proposed. This process performance measurement model allows direct identification of interdependencies of the highest level goals and process performance indicators, and has a certain flexibility and adaptability. Then, the case study research was done. Based on the study findings, previously conceptualized model is improved. Results of research and proposed GPI model create the basis for better and easier performance management, but also for further research in this area.