Adequate design of logistics network provides an appropriate platform for efficient and effective supply chain management. Efficient logistics network also leads to a competitive advantage of a company and help them to cope with the growing and stricter regulations in the field of environmental protection and the uncertainties of the business. Logistics network configurations (e.g. definition of location, facilities and technology facilities) is one of the most important strategic issues in supply chain management and its impact on the overall performance of the supply chain is extremely high. The research subject presented in this paper are integrated models of forward and reverse logistics supply. Integrated models of logistics and reverse logistics supply, are also known as closed-loop supply chains, and they are defined as networks that include traditional channels and traditional logistics activities and flows along with the return channel. One of the main reasons for the development of an integrated network of logistics and supply reverse logistics are cost reduction produced in the entire supply chain, increase profits, and achivement of specific goals regarding legal statutes and regulations that are businesses facing and which are related to the heightened concern about environment. The basic premise of this paper is that methods from the field of operations research based on mathematical models of the considered phenomena and processes, can be efficiently used to make decisions in a logistics system that also includes the processes of supply and reverse processes. The aim of the research is to contribute to the development of an integrated model of supply logistics and reverse logistics. The problem to be solved is the determination of integrated logistics network in order to unite the network of logistics and reverse logistics 7 supply, and thereby contribute by increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of the entire supply chain. In this dissertation, we presented five models that describe the problems selection of locations and routes in integrated logistics models of supply and reverse logistics. The problems are solved with multi-criteria analysis and heuristic methods. One of the presented models of the selection of location is solved using fuzzy AHP method. Four NP hard problems were solved using heuristic methods. For mathematical models with one or more objective functions were developed heuristics based on Variable neighborhood search (VNS) method. For each of the four models that are solved using VNS two algorithms. For local search Variable neighborhood descend (VND) is used for all models and the same algorithm is used for all four models. Problems with a small number of nodes are solved to the optimallity and the results obtained with heuristics are compared with the optimal solutions. Optimal solutions are presented to assess and verify solutions obtained by heuristics. Results of the research show that the developed heuristics provide solutions close to optimal, and that the execution time using heuristics is significantly shorter. The expected results should be used by researchers in the field dealing with the principles of logistics and logistics as a science, but also by practitioners who make logistical decisions in production companies.