The aim of the research in his doctoral thesis is the formulation of the concept of integrated advertising whose implementation is achieved by maximizing performance and achieving positive effects, both in terms of advertisers and target audience. In the thesis, the effects of using different instruments of advertising and the possibility of their integration are determined, in order to transmit a unified message to the audience in a way that would generate their positive cognitive and affective reactions. Empirical research was conducted in December 2015 at the Faculty of Organizational Sciences on a sample of 322 second-year students of the faculty. The survey was carried out in two successive stages. In the first phase, three experiments were carried out under controlled laboratory conditions and they included exposing respondents to certain audio-visual materials, specially adapted for these purposes, in which indirect, direct and integrated advertising appeared. In the second phase, respondents filled out questionnaires in printed form, designed to assess their cognitive and affective reactions. For purposes of assessing cognitive components, tests of unaided recall, aided recall and recognition were used, while for the purpose of assesing affective reactions, test of evaluation of attitudes of the respondents about the different types of advertising and products that are advertised were used. Based on the results of empirical research, obtained for all three types of advertising (indirect, direct and integrated), integrated advertising showed the greatest potential for planning the positioning of brands in the minds of the audience. Satisfactory results (slightly worse than in the case of integrated) were achieved in the case of direct advertising, but it can be concluded that this is due to focus of the audience on an experimental material they watched, which does not reflect the real situation. The results showed that, without specific reminders, audience poorly remembers indirectly advertised brands, which indicates that this type of advertising used alone does not give the desired results. On the other hand, the respondents expressed positive attitudes towards indirect advertising, which makes it an attractive instrument for overcoming the resistance of the auditorium, which can result from excessive exposure to various marketing stimuli from the environment. This result of the study clearly implies the need for planning advertising primarily in an integrated form, with synergistic messages. Based on the results obtained, in the context of integrated advertising planning, indirect advertising could get primary importance in relation to the direct advertising, taking into account a number of other objectives, other than the objective motivation to purchase. Positioning in the minds of the target audience, and implying a resonant effect may be stronger stimulus in terms of long-term investments integrated with other instruments of marketing and corporate communications.