The objective of the paper is to expand the level of knowledge about quality costing in current practice, and to determine the need for defining а quality cost model in the contex of process-systemic approach. The paper presents a study that was conducted on 186 companies, from different industries. Only companies that are familiar with quality costs were selected for the research. The database of companies for the research was formed using three indicators of the companies’ familiarity with quality costs. The results show that there is a high level of awareness of quality costs importance, and that there is an increase in the number of companies managing these costs. Factors affecting quality costs management systems were pointed out, and associations among variables which define those systems are analysed. In addition, the requirements of standard ISO 9001:2015, which are in statistically significant association with the variables defining quality costs management, were selected according to the companies’ standpoint towards the importance of their fulfillment. Given that the research results point to the need for defining а quality cost model in the contex of process-systemic approach, the PAF model is used in this paper on the process level, in order to propose a quality cost model where the elements of quality costs are considered in relation to the outputs of the processes, and where the principle that one process affects the quality of another process by its outputs is taken into consideration. In the model, quality costs are determined for each process in two moments: the current (before taking measurs) and expected (after taking measurs). Necessary control or improvement measures are taken on the basis of the causes of nonconformity analysis and according to the PAF model assumption that preventive and appraisal activities reduce failure costs and the total costs of quality. In the model, the difference between the total quality costs in two observed moments is seen as the greatest possible quality cost reduction for the observed process. This value is used as a criterion for ranking the processes according to their priority for taking defined control or improvement measures, considering the assumption of the PAF model that greater costs mean lower quality and hence a higher priority for taking such measures.