Stochastic programming is a part of the operational research which investigates ways to incorporate uncertainty in the process of decision-making and that accepts the fact that the decision maker will not always have all the information needed readily available. The main problem in application of stochastic programming comes from the uncertainty of parameters in model and the fact that optimal solution is defined for the deterministic equivalent (double) of the original problem. Another problem is to evaluate the quality of a specific deterministic equivalent from the perspective of the value of criterion function, that can be a random, as well as from the perspective of probability of satisfying stochastic constraints. Stochastic programming is applied in many areas, and some of the most common problems solved using stochastic programming are in the fields of production planning, supply chains, logistics, transportation, portfolio management, marketing and in the field of finance, and many other areas. There are three common approaches in solving stochastic programming problems: stochastic optimization, robust optimization and chance constrained programming, and they represent the starting point of all the research in this field of optimization. Robust optimization is a conservative approach that is orientated on the worst case scenario by defining such a deterministic equivalent of the original problem that removes all uncertainty from the model. Chance constrained programming is an approach that treats uncertainty in the parameters of the constraints in the model and uses different techniques in solving these problems. The basic presumption in this approach is that a certain constraint, which is stochastic and uncertain, has to be satisfied with a predefined probability. The reason for developing and application of such an approach is the need to describe the constraints in such a manner that the predefined probability of satisfying constraints is actually a risk that the solution obtained won‘t be satisfied and which the decision maker is willing to accept. The main and most challenging part of the chance constraint 7 approach is tractability, that is above all connected to the possibility of finding the appropriate probability distributions of the stochastic parameters. Nevertheless, all of the aforementioned approaches to stochastic programming are complementary approaches in solving optimization problems with uncertainty, with its own pros and cons. The field of research in this dissertation is investigating different approaches in treating uncertainty in mathematical models, i.e. developing a new approach in solving stochastic programming models. The basic assumption of dissertation is that the real life problem of stochastic programming can be efficiently solved by using the combination of the classic deterministic optimization and simulation. The goal of the research is the contribution to the field of stochastic programming through the development of the new approach in solving weak structured problems. To be more precise, a new original method is proposed in the dissertation: iterative optimization-simulation approach. The approach consists of two phases: optimization phase in which the deterministic equivalent of the original problem is solved to optimality, and a simulation phase in which probability of satisfying constraints is checked using simulation. Every deterministic equivalent represents a new scenario, which is checked using the power of simulation. If the decision maker is not satisfied with the result, a new scenario of the original stochastic problem with new deterministic values will be defined. The accumulated experience from checking scenarios is used to consider and formulate heuristics as simple rules for scenario generation. The main goal of the research is to use the optimal solutions achieved through implementation of this approach to solving stochastic models as good managerial decisions that will achieve the realization of the goals and implementation of the stochastic models in real life problems. The greatest contribution of this dissertation is defining a new approach to solving problems of stochastic optimization, i.e. creating an efficient way to solve stochastic models using a simulation approach. Other than this, we will propose a new scenario in 8 solving stochastic optimization models that will enable a much simpler application of the appropriate algorithms in solving those models and implementing them in real life world.