The process of generating high-quality series of random numbers is the most sensitive and most important factor of any cryptographic system so that the way of design and verification of the characteristics of generators require careful and studious approach. The greatest impact on the quality of generated sequences in random value generators based on the sound card have the height of the randomness source of entropy and the applied post-processing procedure. Using this postprocessing procedure, distillation of digitized form of random analog signal is done, with the result of obtaining a set of truly random numbers of uniform distribution.The subject of this dissertation is the analysis of existing and presentation of a new class of random sequence generators based on a sound card. Sequences of random numbers are unavoidable factors of a wide range of areas, from cryptography, simulation, games of chance, sampling, decision-making, medicine and aesthetics, to the art. Most used random values generator is the pseudorandom number generator (PRNG). Pseudorandom number generator is a mathematical algorithm that creates a deterministic, periodic array of numerical values determined by the initial state under the name of SID. A true random number generator (TRNG) were, unlike the PRNG, based on non-deterministic natural phenomena such as sound noise, radioactive decay, thermal noise generated by semiconductor, thermal noise of resistors, photoelectric effects and a variety of quantum phenomena, and their products are non-periodic true random numbers. On sound cards, in order to obtain the best possible random numbers, many researches have been carried out. Most of these researches have used the approaches that were based on the needs of the PRNGs or their structures. In this dissertation an approach was developed in order to obtain true random bits based on the sound card of computer hardware, which is induced with random signal noise in the environment, and postprocessing (distillation) with a new process of mixing the input string and XOR-ing neighboring bits (Mibis & XOR). The presented method of post-processing provides a simple and efficient separation and removal of adjacent bits of the input string, between which there is a correlation, then in the newly obtained set, the XOR-ing of neighboring bits, reducing the autocorrelation, increasing entropy and reducing bias of output bits set. Examinations conducted with statistical tests of randomness have shown that this class of generators has excellent characteristics and that in a very short period of time generates a large amount of true random number of high quality randomness. In the first part of the dissertation (Chapters 2 and 3) a theoretical basis necessary for understanding the original contributions set out in the second part is presented. For this reason,firstly, in Chapter 2, to the extent necessary, concepts of random process, random signal and stochastic signal sources are introduced, as necessary factors in the process of obtaining a true random series of numbers and then in the Chapter 3 basics of sound cards and environmental noise signals. The second part of the dissertation (Chapters 4 and 5) shows the original research results. First, in Chapter 4 the results achieved in the development of new methods of obtaining random sequences as well as basic characteristics of a true random number generators are presented. The working principle of a true random number generators, classification and characteristics, the latest research, designs and stages in his work are explained in detail. A variety of post- processing techniques, their effectiveness, advantages and disadvantages are also displayed. In Chapter 5 the results of application of the new distillation techniques are presented. A special place is occupied by the significance and development of the new process of obtaining true random sequences in order to obtain random number generators, which are fast, efficient and cheap and therefore accessible to a wide audience. Within the dissertation special attention is given to the development of new effective methods of obtaining random sequences based on the use of hardware potential of personal desktop systems and new types of lap-tops, tablets and smartphone devices. It is shown that an efficient system is presented because it allows rapid generation of random values with sufficient unpredictability and therefore, although intended for the cryptographic purposes, is very suitable for use in many applications that various fields require. The achieved results represent a good use of support to the development of hardware and software-environment basis for further process improvements of random sequence generators. Keywords: True Random Number Generator, Mixing Bits in Steps and XOR-ing of Adjacent Bits, Environmental noise, Sound card, Entropy, Statistical tests. 