Constant access to product, service and software quality improvement enables every organization a flexible reaction to quick changes which are characteristic for modern market economies. Maintaining the competitive ability on the market is achieved by continuous improvement of product, service and software quality. Quality improvement can be achieved only by managing all the process input elements that impact quality. Under the concept of product, as in “result of a certain process”, in this thesis we will consider: 1) product; 2) service and 3) software. In this thesis we will show the methodology of establishing and evaluation of user’s requirements as well as defining the process input elements - factors impacting the fulfillment of these needs. In the process of product realization there are a number of factors that impact the quality and fulfillment of user’s requirements, which is complicated product quality management. There are always a great number of alternative solutions for improving the quality of product. Any solution for improvement is characterized by certain costs of implementation and different impact on the quality of product. When evaluating alternative solutions for improving the quality, it’s not a problem to determine the costs of implementation for every solution. The biggest problem is to determine the influence of improvement of the certain factor on the quality of product, and indirectly on user’s satisfaction. The question is how to choose the optimal (the best) combination of factors which impact the quality of product under conditions of limited financial recourses. What will the effect of improving certain factors which impact the quality of product be? To analyze the effect of improving factors which impact the quality of product on final product conformity with the user’s requirements, it will be used the conformity of the final product simulation using the Markov’s process with the help of programming language Matlab. This thesis is a significant contribution to improving the modeling methodology and managing the factors that impact the quality of product. An important contribution of this thesis is the social contribution and ability to solve practical problems in business systems which are related to quality improvement of processes which influence the fulfillment of requirements. Results of the research can serve as a basis for making decisions regarding the direction which should be taken in order to improve product quality. Key words: quality, product quality, process input elements, factors that impact product quality, quality improvement, Markov’s processes, quality improvement effects simulation. 