Distance Learning System – DLS is modern-day concept of education that is rapidly gaining its universal approach. DL concept is based on tutoring systems and its modules (assistant module, tutor module, modules for tracing and recognizing emotions, motivational modules, etc.) which act in correlation with the feedback information from the system. The modularity of DL system is significant first and foremost in connection with correctional roles, adaptive capacity, process of automation and self-adapting of DL system. This new concept of DL system has allowed easy introduction, broad presence and higher functionality of contemporary Learning Management Systems – LMS. LM systems are used for creating, organizing, realization, administration and verifying classes in regard to educational surroundings. Defining educational surroundings and preparing for class starts with recognizing qualities of students, groups of students, dividing them into groups according to their predispositions, former knowledge, and orientation. In other words we need to be aware of characteristic, tendencies and capabilities of every student as an individual. Enrolling in classes, during classes and especially when confronted whit difficult mathematical tasks, certain misinterpretations and lack of clarity are going to occur. This leads to variety of emotions, absent-mindedness, drops of concentrations and motivation. This is when DL system and all of the modules included signalize irregularities and lack of study quality that is no longer in proportion to individual needs of every student. With help of module of correctional functions this problem should be resolved. This is why it is extremely important to, from the very beginning, indentify characteristics of students and valid factors of educational environment. In regards to this, every individual student or every group of students has to be assigned a proper combination of DL system modules so it would be possible to successfully follow up with the classes and give quality estimate at the end of the course. All these different factors that are defining educational surroundings have to be specified with weighting coefficients on account of consequential effects. In retrospect, it is crucial to construct mathematical modules based on two types of information that will provide suitable grade for every student that is part of distance learning program. First type of information represents input information that takes into account grade point average, grades from similar subjects gained during previous educational stage, level of motivations that student posses, etc. Second type of information is based on emotional reactions that student show when confronted with tasks and assignments as a part of their classes which have a sole purpose to master material of the course. Apart from this it is necessary to create mathematical models that include multiple-criteria grading of certain platforms of DL studies all with one goal to correlate certain situations with teaching process all in the best interest of every individual student or groups of students. Sometimes it is not possible to simply use this multiple-criteria grading method, because of the structure of method itself. So, while working, in order to reach the best possible results, certain grading method is created for every specific case viz. educational surroundings. 