Every day modern companies are facing the problems of overload of information and data and that makes hard for them to run a business and to make effective business decisions. It is necessary for companies to find a good way of implementing the management knowledge in order to improve the business activity. Moreover, the protection of the way of accessing organizational memory (the knowledge of the company), his trade and management of it is the new approach on which companies pay more attention to. The implementation of the concept of management intelligence, in order for companies to manage the organizational memory, becomes indispensable element of the successful companies’ strategies. Integrated automated organizational memory management (knowledge of one company), although very complex, is a solution for the interaction of knowledge management and information technology. In that way, it is easier for a company to explain the process of making decision in one company, but also for the flow of documentation, information and data. With the integrated automated memory management of the organization, the company sees the possibility of obtaining detailed data based on which concrete business decision-making is facilitated. Moreover, here comes the request for the protection of one such integrated automated process. In accordance with certain adopted international standards (ISO 27001), management in such systems as the organization's memory ,should provide a model for establishing the implementation, handling, monitoring, review, maintenance and improvement of the organization's memory security management system. Protection and security of the organization's memory through a cryptographic solution should satisfy the balance between user requirements, functionality within the organization's memory and the need to protect sensitive data and preserve their integrity. This integrated automated process of memory management of the organization is a solution that could find its use both in the field of learning intelligent systems and in existing systems of modern business decision making. Digital signing would ensure the indisputability of documents and their immutability, which the proposed cryptographic solutions provide in accordance with the current legal regulations for electronic documents. In this paper, one of the proposed ways to protect the integrated system for the process of memory management of the organization will be the possibility of recording them in encrypted form. This will make the data available only through the company's information system. This paper will present the organization's own cryptographic solution for memory protection from the point of view of knowledge management. Access to documents and data would be available only to system users who are explicitly authorized to do so through the access to permission management system. Digital signing would ensure the indisputability of documents and their immutability, which the proposed cryptographic solutions provide in accordance with the current legal regulations for electronic documents. Principles and models that provide both data protection and privileged access to data will be discussed, all with the goal of making decisions based on the organization's memory. The best example for such an analysis are security information agencies, and there are numerous examples of both good organizations and omissions in their work. 