The  results  of  this  dissertation  have  revealed  that  tourist  guiding  has  an  important  and  multifaceted  role  in  contemporary  tourism,  primarily  in  regard  of  the  presentation  of  destinations  and  attractions  to  visitors  and  tourists.  Tourist  guiding  operates  in  the  form  of  a  guided  tour  which  customers  select  by  their  own  will  and  its  informal  nature  facilitates  the  effective  transfer  of  information,  messages,  knowledge  and  emotions.  A  safe  and  quality  tourism  experience  offered  by  a  guided  tour  involves  the  tourist  guide,  tourists  and  the  environment, and is fulfilled when all the three components interact at the same point in space  and  time.  Various  relationships  are  then  established,  between  tourists  and  the  environment,  tourists  and  the  guide,  as  well  as  between  all  the  three  sides.  The  guides’s  commentary  (narration)  and  his  management  of  tour  group  dynamics  have  a  distinct  influence  on  the  experience of guided tour participants. Hence, it might be said that tourist guides affect not only  the  quality  of  a  destination’s  integral  tourism  product,  but  also  the  product of  individual  tour  operators  and  travel  agencies.  Their  role  in  the  tourism  system  distinguishes  itself  by  its  potential  to  manage  and  orchestrate  tourism  experiences,  enhance  destination  promotion  and  implement  the  goals  of  sustainable  and  responsible  tourism.  What  tourist  guides  present  and  interpret  takes  effect  on  the  way  in  which  their  customers  experience  a  place  or  attraction,  understand local culture, engage in tourist activities and how they behave during the stay. As a  presenter  and  interpreter,  the  tourist  guide  acts  as  a  destination’s  representative  and  „ambassador” in the eyes of tourists. It depends on  him whether tourists would  feel welcome,  decide  to  stay  a  bit  longer  or  come  again.  It  is  he  who  influences  tourists’  perceptions  of  a  destination,  and  he  or  she  sometimes  even  becomes  a  destination  brand.  Tourist  guiding  is,  undoubtedly,  one  of  the  very  important  strategic  factors  of  successful  presentation  of  destinations in contemporary tourism, decisively affecting the tourism experience, the length of  stay as well as the resulting economic and social benefits.