The  inspiration  for  this  doctoral  dissertation  is  embedded  in  the  observed  insufficient  or  inadequate  application of psychology and understanding of the consumer in marketing management practice. The focus  is on the new product development, which carries complexity and financial risk, requiring extensive analysis  and  knowledge  of  the  comprehensive  process  of  marketing  management.  The  dissertation  studies  the  application  of  psychology  in  the  development  of  new  products,  by  analyzing  the  example  of  the  instant  coffee products, Grand Instant and Doncafe Instant, on the Serbian market in the period from 2007 to 2015.   Empirical sources rely on primary and secondary data. The primary data were collected by quantitative  methodology, on a representative sample of 800 respondents, 18 to 30 years old, in order to analyze attitudes  and  customer  satisfaction,  as  well  as  qualitative  methodology  (with  quantification  of  specific  questions)  based on interviews with managers of the two companies (Grand and Doncafe), in order to understand the  process  and  attitudes  at  companys’  level.  The  analysis  was  performed  by  descriptive  statistical  methods.  Secondary  data  on  the  brand  performance  (market  share,  share  value,  brand  familiarity,  brand  loyalty,  strength  and  brand  image,  and  positioning  in  the  minds  of  consumers)  are  data  derived  from  longitudinal  studies undertaken by three regionally known market research agencies.   investigates  whether  psychology  was  employed  with   The  dissertation  the  necessary  knowledge,  understanding  and  appreciation  in  the  new  product  developments.  The  main  hypothesis,  that  insufficient  attention to consumers and psychological processes in the new product development, impacts the success of  the product, as well as consumer satisfaction, has been confirmed. The consumer was treated as a group of  people who are expected to react to a product,  as the trend in neighboring countries requires. Although new  product development is a complex process that requires knowledge and application of postulates of the entire  marketing management, it appears to be frequently simplified. The first assumption, that marketing managers  in the process of new product development rely on psychology and that they are aware of its importance, but  use  it  superficially,  has  also  been  confirmed.  Nonetheless,  the  reason  for  this  is  not  only  time-limited  competitiveness,  but  other  factors  as  well.  The  second  assumption,  that  consumers  feel  that  they  are  not  sufficiently  involved  in  the  processand  show  it  by  dissatisfaction  and  non-usage  of  the  product,  has  been  confirmed.  In  the  analysed  case  study,  the  consumers  were  not  satisfied  with  the  way  Grand  Kafa  and  Doncafe addressed them when developing new products.    Initiating the process of new product development based on consumer needs and by satisfying their (i.e.  peoples’)  expectations,  as  required  by  the  concept  of  marketing,  emphasizes  indubitable  significance  and  contribution of psychology in marketing. The dissertation concludes that, in practice, enterprises in Serbia, in  addition to insufficient application of psychology in the new product development, face shortcomings related  to  the  process  itself  -  such  as  the  lack  of  marketing  concept  acceptance,  production  of  certain  formal  documents,  and  strategic  planning  as  well  as  consumer  research.  A  modification  of  a  new  product  development model is therefore proposed, aiming to overcome the four observed shortcomings by mandating  the  creation  of  formal  documents  in  various  phases  of  product  development,  which  requires  consumer  research and strategic planning,ensuring respect for the modern concept of marketing. 