Technological structure and factor intensity of Serbian merchandise export have been improved  in  the  period  2000-2014.  However,  the  changes  didn’t  in  the  critical  extent  improve  the  structure  of  domestic exports and thereby didn’t create conditions for its strong sustainable long-term growth. The  quality level of Serbian merchandise exports, which can be traced through the share of goods of higher  levels of processing, lags greatly behind the countries in the EU and to a lesser extent to the Central  European economies in transition.   The paper analyzes the quantitative changes in the technological structure and factor intensity  of  domestic  merchandise  exports  through  changes  in  the  tendency  of  shares  of  skill-intensive  manufactures,  as  well  as  high  and  'medium-high'  technology  products  in  total  exports  in  the  period  2000-2014.   It  is  necessary  to  have  the  transfer  of  modern  technology  and  investments,  especially  through  FDI, in competitive sectors which would 'spread' export offer. Improved approach to employment policy  regulations  and  an  extensive  re-organization  of  science  and  education  system  is  needed.  A  targeted  industrial  policy,  sector  and  firm  level  strategies  are  necessary  to  give  momentum  to  a  shift  towards  technology-intensive  activities,  associated  with  higher  spill-over  effects.  Export-led  growth,  which  is  essential  to  Serbia,  requires  an  expansion  of  foreign  trade.  Institutional  framework  conditions  for  foreign  trade  expansion  already  exist  (the  Stabilization  and  Association  Agreement  of  the  EU  with  Serbia, as well as CEFTA). For Serbia it is significant that euro area imports demand is projected to  grow  moderately  in  2015  and  2016,  in  spite  the  fact  that  imports  remain  constrained  by  the  subdued  growth of total euro area demand and some downward impact stemming from the recent depreciation of  the euro.   Based on this research, the significance of the external environmental factors, as well as of the  competitiveness strategies and their correlation with the identified critical competitiveness indicators of  small  and  medium  sized  enteprises  in  the  transition  economies  can  be  adequately  observed.  Thus,  by  adapting  to  the  environment,  that  is,  by  removing  the  key  obstacles  in  the  environment  by  implementation of adequate competitive strategies, adequate assumptions for the strategic positioning  of small and medium sized enterprises in the transitional context are being created in order to improve  their competitiveness.   Serbia  needs  a  new  concept  od  systemic  competitiveness.  The  concept  of  systemic  competitiveness  seeks  to  capture  both  the  political  and  the  economic  determinants  of  successful  industrial  development.  It  refers  to  a  pattern  in  which  state  and  social  actors  deliberately  create  the  conditions  for  successful  industrial  development.  The  concept  distinguishes  between  four  levels:  The  microlevel  of  the  firm  and  inter-firm  networks,  the  mesolevel  of  specific  policies  and  institutions,  the  macrolevel  of  generic  economic  conditions,  and  the  metalevel  of  slow  variables  like  socio-cultural  structures,  the  basic  order  and  orientation  of  the  economy,  and  the  capacity  of  social  actors  to  formulate strategies. 