The  tourism  competitiveness,  and  thus  competitiveness  of  tourist  destination,  has  become,  both  for  scientific  community  and  tourist  destinations,  a  very  important  subject  of  research. Contemporary  market trends determine the development of the tourist destinations  and  they  have  to  offer  quality  experiences  which  will  essentially  make  destination  different  from  the  competition.  Destinations  need  to  create  quality  experiences  in  order  to  become  more attractive and to ensure better competitive position. The role of destination management  is to use all existing destination resources efficiently and effectively, in accordance with the  principles of sustainability, and to define clear and effective strategies for destination product  development  in  order  to  create  added  value  to  tourists  experience  gained  in  the  destination.  For the achievement of a better competitive position for tourism destinations it is essential to  continuously  measure  the  competitiveness  of  a  tourist  destination,  with  the  use  of  many  evaluation techniques whether they measure competitiveness retroactively, in the present or in  the future. Competitiveness measurement, as such a process, in modern tourism becomes the  basis  for  the  development  of  destination  products.  By  measuring,  certain  results  are  gained  which define the position of a tourist destination in respect to a defined competitive set. The  results create a basis for directing the development and overcoming the shortcomings of the  current  competitive  position.  For  this  purpose,  as  an  initial  step  in  defining  the  competitiveness  of  tourist  destinations,  competitiveness  indicators  are  rated  in  such  way  to  establish  a  framework  and  provide  guidelines  for  the  future  development  of  tourism  and  destination competitiveness position.   in   this   that   The  research   thesis  suggests   the  continuous  measurement  of  competitiveness  becomes  an  indispensable  part  of  tourist  destination  management  process.  This  dissertation  is  devoted  to  tourist  destination  competitiveness  and  indicators  for  competitiveness measurement, with special emphasis on Serbia as a tourist destination. This  work  establishes  the  basis  for  defining  the  model  that  could  be  used  for  continuous  measurement  of  competitiveness  of  Serbian  tourism  in  the  future.  Accordingly,  the  adapted  integrated  model  of  destination  competitiveness  here  proposed  is  used  for  measuring  competitiveness of Serbia as a tourist destination. Conclusions indicate factors and indicators  of competitiveness where Serbia should focus future attention in the development. The results  indicate  the  advantages  and  disadvantages  of  Serbia  competitiveness  position  as  a  tourist  destination.