Spas in the Republic of Serbia represent a significant touristic product, which is attractive for tourist in the domestic and international market alike. This form of tourism is constantly changing in it's offer to the tourists as in the tourist's need. The high amount of sophistication in the tourists' demand in touristic offer and a desire for recreation and relaxation in the spas of Serbia points out a necessity of adjustment of holders of the touristic offer with a goal of overtaking the competitor's position. One of the ways for them becoming recognizable and competitive on the tourist market is to apply a certain combination of communications means on potential tourists. Regardless of the growing interest, the touristic need of spa services is physically far away from them so it is necessary to give them information about the services and contents of spas in Serbia. The appliance of modern information technology in promotion of the offer of spa tourism made possible a significant benefit for tourists and the holders of the touristic offer. The creators of marketing activities in the spas of Serbia achieve benefits in the sense of the simplest, most economic and most containing contact with potential tourists. From the tourists' point of view, the benefits of the Informational technology are seen in the simple informing of the offers of spas and in sharing pictures and other content about the spa in which they have stayed. The subject of this research are the traditional and digital means of communication and their use in promotion of spas in Serbia as the use of those as a source of information in the process of making the decision of visiting a certain spa. Research of web presentation of chosen spa destinations showed that all spas have a web site, but that they do not use the full potential and benefits of this way of promotion. Analysis of use of social media like Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Pinterest, Google +, showed the presence of irregularities in using them. The creators of communication with potential tourists through social media, not appreciating the importance of updating of information and content on a regular basis. Research of influence of traditional and digital means of communication on the decision of visiting a spa destination was made in the goal of making a hypotesys on the necessity of optimal combination of traditional and digital means of communication while targeting potential visitors of Spas in Serbia, proven or rejected. The results showed that tourists usually opt for possession of spas in Serbia television and based on they receive recommendations from friends. From the aspect of digital media, for tourists as a source of information used by Facebook and the web presentation. For the successful development of tourism in Serbian spas, it is essential that holders of marketing activities using the appropriate combination of traditional and digital means of communication.