There is a trend in the cruise tourism where cruise companies are increasingly focusing on the quality of the cruise experience since the quality of cruise experience has a significant impact on the overall satisfaction of tourists and determining their future behavior. Bearing in mind the importance of the quality of the cruise experience, this dissertation will examine its nature, that is its antecedents and its consequences. The research problem is related to gaining a deeper understanding of the nature of the cruise experience, that is, to find a methodological instrument for measuring its antecedents and its consequences. In this dissertation, the author has decided on a holistic approach in testing the model of service theater (cruise ship performance) and the service quality (quality dimensions). These components can then be utilized for the successful design of quality cruise experience. The research study is based on the following research philosophies: postmodernism, postpositivism, and interpretivism, with the implementation of appropriate quantitative and qualitative data collection techniques. In line with the research philosophies, the research approach in this paper is conceived of as a combination of induction and deduction. Structural equation modeling was used to test the conceptual model. The results confirmed that employees, guests, service setting, and service quality are the antecedents of the cruise experience. Only experienced emotion though had a positive impact on overall satisfaction and determined future behavior. The nature of the cruise experience is a topic that hasn't gained much attention in the world of academia. Because of this, it can be argued that this study contributed to the ontology of the quality of the cruise experience and the development of the theory of quality of cruise experience. The research was carried out on a cruise ship in cooperation with the guests, so it can be established that this research incorporated all aspects of the further practical application. Based on this, we can claim that the research results have managerial importance due to the data obtained, the results of research, insights, and recommendations that can be applied in practice.