In the past few decades nautical and therefore the cruise tourism is rapidly developing. When analyzing geographical distribution of cruising destinations, we can see that cruise tourism is developed in the whole world. Besides the undeniable positive effects of bringing people together, better mutual understanding and positive financial effects, the development of cruise tourism has certain negative impacts. For this reason, it is essential to strategicaly manage this type of tourism, with particular emphasis on management in accordance with the concept of sustainable development. This paper will describe the realistic state of cruise tourism with special emphasis on the municipality of Kotor, its potentials, advantages and disadvantages, strategic development as well as the competitiveness of Kotor on the international cruise tourism market. The author pays special attention to the ways in which cruise tourism improves the offer of the town and the positive economic effects of cruise tourism. Author conducted the survey of attitudes of economic sector and population of Kotor on the role and importance of cruise tourism. The results show that the cruise tourism is perceived as a significant aspect of tourism in Kotor which can enable Montenegro to become a world famous tourist destination. However, respondents think that cruise tourism is underdeveloped and recognize the need for encouraging the development of this tourism sector. The most important identified positive effects of cruise tourism were economic effects in the form of local communities' revenue growth and the creation of new jobs. Th most important socio- cultural positive effects are getting familiar with new cultures and presenting local traditions and customs. The most notable negative effect of cruise tourism is degradation of natural resources. The respondents believe that the state has the greatest responsibility for maximizing the positive and minimizing the negative effects of cruise tourism, which should strengthen the legislative regulatory measures. Of particular importance is the strengthening of education about the importance of cruise tourism and improving the dialogue between key stakeholders in order to respect the needs of local communities.