Financial distress and insolvency have negative repercussions on a company’s management, owners, suppliers, employees, customers and other stakeholders. Through the mechanism of bankruptcy reorganisation, efficient insolvency law ensures the survival of insolvent but economically viable companies. In this regard, the key issues refer to the influence of financial distress and bankruptcy reorganisation on key corporate-governance mechanisms and how these changes, combined with applied bankruptcy rules and time spent in bankruptcy, influence the success of adopted reorganisation plans. The objective of this dissertation is to investigate the influence of financial distress and bankruptcy reorganisation on key corporate-governance mechanisms in large and medium- sized companies that adopted a reorganisation plan or pre-pack reorganisation plan in the Republic of Serbia during the period of January 2009 – June 2015. It also analyses the success of the adopted reorganisation plans and pre-packaged reorganisation plans with an objective to determine which factors can contribute to the rehabilitation of the Serbian corporate sector. Out of 83 sample companies, ownership structure changed in 18 companies, while top-management structure changed in 32 companies. In the observed companies, the pre-bankruptcy ownership structure changed after adopting the reorganisation plan, while top-management turnover was relatively constant throughout both the bankruptcy period and the first year succeeding the adoption of the reorganisation plan. A logistic and OLS regression analysis indicates that two factors influenced change in the pre-bankruptcy ownership structure: the company’s liquidity and whether the owners were involved in running the distressed company prior to declaring bankruptcy. Also, results of the logistic and OLS regression provided evidence that the company’s size and applied bankruptcy procedure influenced top-management turnover in Serbian large and medium-sized distressed companies. The influence of all other observed variables on pre-bankruptcy ownership and top-management structures was deemed to be statistically insignificant. Concerning the success of bankruptcy reorganisation in the Republic of Serbia, the results in this dissertation show that 75% of observed companies are still reorganising while 25% of companies applied for bankruptcy after the adoption of the reorganisation plan or pre-packaged reorganisation plan. Establishment of a creditor’s board or other similar body that has a smaller number of members after the adoption of a reorganisation plan or pre-packaged reorganisation plan can increase the success of bankruptcy reorganisation in the Republic of Serbia. Overall, results of the analyses presented in this dissertation suggest that bankruptcy reorganisation could be used as an effective mechanism for the rehabilitation of the corporate sector in transition economies. However, this process has to be supported with changes in corporate-governance practice and institutional and legal reforms. 