In contemporary economic environment, international financing in order to meet social needs is a factor without which a modern society cannot function. The subject of the research of this dissertation is the recognition of the accent of international financing by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the leading investment organizations in the European economy, and the effects that it has on the market and economy of the Republic of Serbia. In the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, this type of international financing, as we know it today, started in 1990 when the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development was formed with the idea of supporting countries in transition. In Serbia, funding by international investment organizations is not new, since the lifting of sanctions by the international community in 2001, and this domain is very important, because without it, the situation in the Serbian economy and the pace of activity during the transition process after the economic sanctions and a deep decline in the Gross Domestic Product during the 1990s would be more unfavourable. Very complex economic relations, new technologies and production imply the need to provide additional sources of financing, which is precisely the basic object of studying this dissertation. The aim of the research is to investigate the importance and the need for the existence of such institutions of foreign investments, as well as to contribute to their further prosperity. All the countries of Central and Eastern Europe had and have a successful and comprehensive cooperation with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, through investment loans, joint financing of projects, joint ventures in various sectors, primarily energy, infrastructure, transport, financial sector and with the aim to transform these economies into market ones and to connect the future unique European market. The main finding of this research is that the national economy cannot be recovered without planned and well-designed borrowing from international financial institutions, with appropriate monitoring and control. Due to the complexity of business relations and the complexity of business opportunities and trends, the very important prerequisite for this kind of financing is fiscal sustainability and monetary stability. The influx of cost-effective, reliable international investments support the grow and development of the economy. The development of the economy in the transition process cannot be imagined without additional international financing. We can also point out to the fact that all the economies that worked with the EBRD had overdeveloped economic growth, and recorded better business results than in the years when they were in a state of recession. The professional public in our country is not sufficiently familiar with the significance of our cooperation with the EBRD, despite the benefits of this cooperation, with the need to build a rational relationship with the country's credit indebtedness. This dissertation also analysed the degree of impact of investments that were implemented in cooperation with the EBRD on the economic recovery and transition of the RS economy and the factors that influence this, and found out a positive corelation between these investments and the rate of growth of GD of RS and as well as the positive influence of EBRD's investments to the rate of growth of GDP of the Republic of Serbia. The analysis confirmed that the EBRD played a significant role in the recovery of the economy and the role of transition through financing and advisory services. Through a detailed overview of economic trends and numerous examples of realization of concrete projects in the dissertation, the advantages of cooperation with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development were pointed out, as well as drawing attention to the importance of some activities and measures in order to improve this cooperation. 