Considering the practical and theoretical problems of the phenomenon of motivation, the question imposed is whether it is sufficient that organizations focus exclusively on motivation management from the aspect of monetary incentives and extrinsic factors so as to improve performance and employee satisfaction. As a starting point of this thesis, the self-determination theory indicates towards the existence of different types of motivation which vary in their level of self-determination. In line with its postulates, the various types of motivation are arranged along the motivation continuum. On one end of the continuum there is the most autonomous, i.e., most self-determined type of motivation- intrinsic motivation.. On the opposite side, at the other end of the continuum there is amotivation i.e., lack of motivation. Various forms of extrinsic motivation are found between these two types of motivation, and they vary in their level of autonomy and self-determination. The applicability of main postulates of the self-determination theory to a sample of employees inside the Republic of Serbia hospitality industry is presented inside this thesis with the aim of promoting motivational techniques and methods. The author examines the degree to which the factors in the social environment such as work climate and type of job have an impact on the structure of motivation (autonomous/regulated/amotivation), and through that motivation on job satisfaction and the individual’s wellbeing. The research was conducted on a sample of employees in 4 and 5-star hotels in Belgrade. The collected data was processed with the application of the statistical program SPSS, version 23. For data analysis we used: descriptive analysis (arithmetic mean, standard deviation), Cronbach Alpha Coefficient for determining reliability of used scales on the tested sample and statistical conclusion. The Pearson correlation coefficient, T-test and analysis of variances were used for testing connections as well as differences according to measured characteristics. The research conducted in this thesis confirms the applicability of the self-determination theory postulates in the work context. 