The subject of this research is to analyse the principles of structural design based on the application of ferrocement within an integrated approach to the design, and evaluation of the achieved results. The analysis concerned is performed according to the research question: What principles should be applied to design the structures based on the application of ferrocement, to enable the achievement of ecological quality of buildings, in line with recommendations for sustainable building development? The main goal of this research is to establish the theoretical basis of the methodological concept of integrated structural design, within an integrated approach to the design and evaluation of buildings for the purpose of achieving ecological quality of buildings. The specific objective of the research is to establish a theoretical and methodological basis of the design and evaluation of construction materials in the framework of an integrated approach to building design. The study assumes that the integrated structural design based on the application of ferrocement enables achieving ecological quality of buildings, which is in line with recommendations for sustainable building development, related to the "reduction of negative environmental impact and resource consumption due to construction, use and dismantling of constructed facilities, with a simultaneous increase in life quality of and health and safety in the built environment“.5 Examining the principles of integrated structural design within an integrated approach to the design and evaluation of buildings, in this research is primarily based on the methodological principles of the system theory.6 This is the methodological and conceptual apparatus for understanding and scientific shaping of the problem of system–buildings. The first segment of the research examined the concept of the ecological quality of a building. The starting point to explore this concept is the human ecology. A building is taken as a boundary of system which the ecological quality is attributed to. A life-cycle is 5 Working Group for Sustainable Construction, An agenda for sustainable construction in Europe, 11. 6 Ludwig Bertalanffy, General System theory: Foundations, Development, Application (New York: George Braziller, 1976). V taken as the time frame during which the ecological quality of the building is assessed.7 The ecological quality of the building within this research was defined as the extent to which performances of the building meet the needs and expectations of its users, which are related to the social and economic benefits achieved with simultaneous protection and improvement of the environment throughout the life-cycle of the building. After a critical analysis of the existing systems to assess the quality of buildings in the context of sustainability, as well as analysis of European Standards for Sustainable Construction, indicators for the integral assessment of ecological quality of buildings were proposed within the research, classified by the interrelated and conditioned sustainability criteria into three groups: indicators within the environmental criteria, indicators within the criteria of social well-being, and indicators within the criteria of economic well-being. Indicators of ecological quality of building, in addition to being the basis for an integrated assessment of the quality of the designed solution, through quantitative and qualitative assessment of the level of designed and achieved performances, within the research were taken as the basis for establishment of integrated project objectives. Integrated project objectives have become the basis for the analysis of integrated structural design principles for the purpose of achieving ecological quality of buildings. In the second segment of the research, the principles of design of building structures were examined in accordance with the integrated project objectives. Originally, the integrated design of buildings was studied, based on targeted integrated performances of buildings during their life-cycle. This form of building design is defined as a design which results in buildings that successfully carry out their function, in accordance with all aspects of sustainability: social, economic and environmental aspects. Then the principles of structural design were examined according to requirements to be satisfied by a building as a whole, that is, structural design based on targeted integrated performances of a building throughout its life-cycle. This type of structural design, defined as the integrated structural design, is based on a systemic approach, in which the structure of the building is seen as a functional unit, i.e., as a sub-system of the building, whose behavior is directed towards the aim of system-building – ecological quality. In this process, a structure cannot be understood, and thus evaluated, without understanding its relationship with the specific function of architectural space. The evaluation is made of the contribution of a structure to 7 European Committee for Standardization, EN 15978:2011. VI performances of the building which is its integral part, throughout the life-cycle. It is a design process in which concepts are evaluated through aggregation of fact and value judgments in accordance with the integrated criteria, that is, quantitative and qualitative indicators of ecological quality of buildings. After comprehending the possible forms of connection and dependency of sub-systems of a building, building structure and construction materials, as well as the behavior of these sub-systems directed towards achieving the goal of the system-building – ecological quality, criteria for the integrated design and assessment of structures based on targeted integrated performances of a building during its life-cycle were derived within the research, for the purpose of achieving ecological quality of buildings. The derived criteria are related to the reduction of harmful emissions into the air, water and soil, as well as to the increase of the resources use efficiency, i.e., reduction of the intensity of their use, as well as to the realization of architectural spaces that contribute to the quality of people's lives and life satisfaction, through preservation and improvement of their health, incitement of the sense of security, amenity and harmony with the environment. In the third segment of the research, the principles of ferrocement design and structures based on its application were studied, in accordance with the criteria for integrated design and assessment of building structures, as well as the ecological effects of the application of this composite material within structures, in accordance with the criteria for the environmental protection during the life cycle of building and in accordance with the criteria for the social well-being during the use phase of a building. Ferrocement, as a composite material, was considered as a subsystem of the building structure. Its design was analyzed through relations and links with the subsystem of a higher order – structure of the building and system-building, as well as through its behavior directed towards achieving the aim of system-building – ecological quality. With this one research, the designers "tools for defining the properties and use of ferrocement"8 were further developed and expanded. A cognitive basis of the design and evaluation of ferrocement and structures based on its application was created, within the integrated approach to the design of buildings. The research tested and confirmed the initial hypothesis according to which the integrated design of structural systems based on the application of ferrocement enables achieving ecological quality of buildings, which is in line with recommendations for 8 Komisija za standarde iz oblasti Betonskih konstrukcija, Tehnička preporuka za ferocement, 2. VII sustainable building development. The research has shown that new "conditions" of building design, which should "ensure sustainable building" according to the Law on Planning and Construction of the Republic of Serbia ("Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia", no. 72/2009, 81/2009 - rev., 64/2010 – Constitutional Court Decision, 24/2011, 121/2012, 42/2013 – Constitutional Court Decision and 50/2013 – Constitutional Court Decision, clause 2), above all, should be based on the integration of project objectives, as well as integral quality assessment of the designed solutions throughout the life-cycle, in accordance with the quantitative and qualitative indicators of ecological quality of buildings. Designing ecologically acceptable solutions should be based on research strategies that transcend disciplinary boundaries, in order to comprehend the relations and connections between the sub-systems of the building, building structure and construction materials, as well as the behavior of these sub-systems directed towards achieving the goal of the system-building – ecological quality. This is a systemic approach whose result, in its practical operationalization, is conception of system-buildings of different relationships and connections between sub-systems, building structure and construction materials, that is, conception of buildings of various quantitative and qualitative properties, with a higher common property – ecological quality.