The dissertation was created as an extension of the research and Magister's thesis "Valorization
of the modernist heritage, on the example of residential architecture in Belgrade at 1947 to 1967
in Belgrade", defended at the Faculty of Architecture, University of Belgrade, 2006. During this
research of the scientific literature in the field of technology, design, history of modern
architecture of Belgrade, as well as many years of observation and work in the design of
housing and other buildings, construction , building renovations often done in precast systems,
the selection of materials is made, along with the evaluation of architectural achievements,
which showcased certainly mark the epoch in which they occurred. Socio – historical research
methodology was used.
The paper raises hypothesis, research objectives, and summarize a very complex era that is the
subject of research, and its socio – cultural, technological, and economic aspects. Evaluation of
modern residential architecture is based on the methodological principles which are, as it seems
fro their application in practice in many countries, imposed as they are relevant and provided
guidance for the establishment of appropriate evaluation criteria. This paper represents genuine
contribution to the development of a methodology for evaluation of modern culture.
Special attention is paid to the social circumstances in which such mass production emerged and
developed. Analysis of social movements, political situation, as well as demographics,
migration, and economic development points to a certain value which is studied period fostered
and promoted. The analysis of housing policy has shown that they are the cause and effect
associated with the development of prefabricated building systems, the general idea of mass
housing construction, and implementation of large housing estates.
Throughout the paper discusses several important issues in the field of residential construction –
whether it is possible to define that extraction forms that represent a political method, then,
would the modern architecture looked different to the housing function in a different way, and –
usage of precast industrialized systems in modern social housing. In addition, the paper
discusses the issue – whether certain types of settlements and certain social groups can be
bounded to the specific type of prefabricated housing construction system.
In one part, this paper gives an overview of that period tendencies in contemporary art practices,
particularly in the related fields of sculpture, painting and other visual arts, but also in mass
culture, which are consumed by the customers of housing. In this paper we draw parallels and
provides an answer to the question, whether the prefabricated building recognized forms of
contemporary artistic expression.
Thanks to the exchange of information and opening to the world, a certain undeniable influence
from abroad, which in many ways came to what was then Yugoslavia. Influence, in fact
exchange of information, is carried out through the exchange of literature, scientific and
professional books and journals, translated texts of foreign authors, as well as temporary
exhibitions of contemporary artists and architects organized in Belgrade. In addition,
professional specialization and study tours to foreign academic centers haven’t been rare thing.
Housing policies did not have continuity, and they were not of long duration, but they have
changed over time, and in the period considered several times for changes. This led to changes
in the relationship between the stakeholders – the investors, the building directorate, large
enterprises and customers (labor organizations, trade unions, local and national government and
state institutions). The paper separates the influencing factors and parallels with the location of
residential areas through analysis of stakeholders – those who have built and – those for whom
the settlements were designed and built. So we come to certain conclusions about relations
beyond the central zone to suburbia settlements in Belgrade and explains topics of social
segregation.
Thanks to the massive housing construction, and a large number of systems and examples,
detailed typology was made and presented, with the proviso that the individual scientific
studies, competitions, and catalogs in particular drew attention because they are in some sense a
practical turning point.
A key part of the work is devoted to evaluation of selected examples. In the section on
typologies, the discussion on open areas was introduced, where the level of newly formed, and
the old established city blocks erased plot. This urban approach clearly associated with social
attitudes toward the topics and issues of ownership, and between the private and public space.
The article explains the phenomenon – how and why the relationship varies one urban
structures, and – as an affect of the prefabrication on the urban whole, whether the number of
alternative solutions of the block increases or decreases. At the architecture of the building
level, this impact is considered in more details, and explains how the prefabrication affects the
relationship between functional areas and zones in a dwelling.
Also, the relations between size kitchen and room number are observed, and standard solutions
of bathroom-kitchen block analyzed in relation to the proposed general typology.
Which type of housing unit was dominant during which time is reviewed. Some parallels with
the traditional organization of Belgrade apartment typical for the central area were withdrawed.
In addition to its value in use, which is undeniable, this paper talks about the issues of cultural
valorization, since one of the goals of long-term work on this subject, it is an initiative of the
institutional protection of representative examples of the modern era in residential architecture
in Belgrade. Give the reasons for selected examples. Explored in the published literature is not
much discussed topic evaluation criteria for modern and contemporary architecture, and this
part is a certain scientific contribution as a result of the conducted research.
A dissertation conclusion summarizes the main elements and the results of extensive research. It
gives an insight into the basic problems, analyze the values, and highlights the typical examples
and the results.
For the purposes of a dissertation, in the meantime, an extensive catalog was made, a detailed
review of almost all architectural components (base typical floor) and residential units built in
Belgrade in industrialized precast systems (including complete and partial prefabricated –
combined realizations). In the concluding remarks, the concept of remodeling was developed.
Also, the advance of technology and programming languages allow the development of
software, which, through combinations, proves a number of features of spatial organization of
residential buildings, despite the small number of defined elements, given the parameters of
industrialized precast systems.
In the appendix are representative photos, and catalogs schematically and graphically show the
most characteristic examples of architectural components (base typical floor) and residential
units built in industrialized precast systems.