In the period of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century, a number of vernacular architectural structures, nowadays regarded as cultural and artistic heritage of Serbian people, were spontaneously built in the region of Stara Planina mountain. Owing to decoration, as an expression of people’s need to embellish and, in a unique manner, enrich the space they live in, the mentioned area possesses a wealth of beautiful forms and elements. This doctoral dissertation is aimed at presenting and analyzing the characteristic decorative forms and elements of the traditional architecture in the Stara Planina region, with an emphasis on their cultural, historical, ethnographical and arts-and-crafts values. The material for the dissertation has been collected in the past 5 years, by visiting the mentioned region and by surveying and analyzing the architecture in 37 mountain villages in the areas of Pirot District and the cities of Pirot and Dimitrovgrad. By the detailed analytical method, the analysis of the authentic forms has been carried out, whereas the application of the comparative method has enabled classification and definition of basic types of decorative forms according to their form, origin and formation, construction techniques and material, as well as their subsequent comparison with the characteristic decorative forms in the broader surroundings of the Stara Planina region in Serbia and Bulgaria. Authentic and unique tradition, which reflects the historical component of the life quality and the spirit of the past times, has been preserved in the elements of traditional architecture in the Stara Planina villages. This architecture is presented by: traditional construction systems, infills, roof eaves, roof structures, bolsters, pillars, porches, porches known as doksati, methods and types of the construction of chimneys ДЕКОРАТИВНO ОБЛИКОВАЊЕ ТРАДИЦИОНАЛНЕ НАРОДНЕ АРХИТЕКТУРЕ У РЕГИОНУ СТАРЕ ПЛАНИНЕ and fireplaces, ćenarke, čuvarkuće etc., with the construction techniques adjusted to natural materials. Examples of authentic houses can be found in the villages rich in decorations: Šugrin, Rsovci, Ragodeš, Kamenica, Slavinje, Visočki Odorovci, and Smilovci; the villages which are less rich in decorations, such as Pakleštica, Gostuša, and Orlja, are still unique, owing to their overall traditional expression. This authentic heritage from the past was created owing to folk builders and the skills of dunđeri, which were passed on thanks to migrant work. Migrant work in the Stara Planina area is a phenomenon of specific economic and migrant movements occurring as a consequence of predominantly insufficiently developed economy and unbalanced economic development and turbulent social events in the 18th, 19th and the beginning of the 20th century. In order to provide for their basic needs or to acquire new property, the local population engaged in various kinds of migrant work: goods transportation, hard manual labour, the work of servants, kashkaval cheese production, but most of migrant workers were employed as builders, until the start of World War II. Migrant workers from the Stara Planina area worked in the surrounding areas towards Bulgaria, Šumadija and, partly, Romania. The factors leading to the decay of tradition in the Stara Planina area are prevalently enormous migrations of the village population to the cities. The villages are abandoned and have a sparse ageing population, while their housing units and accompanying structures are in the state of ruin and dilapidation.