Theoretical considerations of landscapes as intrinsically characteristic of human society first appear in Western civilization in the early Renaissance. The late eighteenth century sees the appearance of a geographical discourse dedicated to explaining the interactive relation between human society and its surroundings. In his 1925 essay “The Morphology of Landscapež, Carl Ortwin Sauer defined cultural landscape as the result of a culture’s action, that is, of a cultural group acting on nature as a medium. Cultural landscape emerges, says Sauer, through the development of a culture in a given space, or else the replacement of one culture with another: cultural landscape is shaped from nature, by human activity. The evolution of geographic exploration throughout the nineteenth, and in particular the twentieth century led to the diversification of the approaches of study of cultural landscape, including one of its aspects ‒ urban landscape. Although the study of landscape has been primarily confined to a geographic discourse until the late seventies of the twentieth century, since then a great number of significant studies have also appeared in the field of architecture and urban studies. In a broad sense, this PhD thesis deals with the urban history of Belgrade in the nineteenth century, from the last decade of the eighteenth century up to the First World War. Apart from the exponential growth of the quantifiable indicators of urbanization, such as population size, population density, urban surface, number of regulated roads, the last quarter century of the period in question shows a qualitative leap in urban development in the form of infrastructure systems unseen in Belgrade prior to this point: electric street lighting, a modern water and waste management system, electric trams. In the qualitative sense, the mentioned utilities corresponded to the degree of development of modern cities in industrially developed countries of the same period. The topic of this thesis is the architectural and urban aspect of the nineteenth century transformation of Belgrade. The research questions, defined in the domain vii of examining the emergence of the modern urban landscape, are divided here into several basic groups and refer to the following: 1) the actors of change (who are the economic and political agents that transform a city, who are the investors in residential, business, commercial and cultural objects, who are the designers of architectural structures and urban plans); 2) the definition of the area that underwent transformation, in particular the specific scope of the spatial treatment expressed in measurable and comparable data; and finally 3) the characteristics of the transformational processes a city undergoes (what is the nature and origin of these processes, are they procedurally established and planned activities or an ad hoc sequence of events, what is the proportion and relationship of these sequences). The primary goal of the research is the analysis of the causal factors of the process of transformation of Belgrade in the nineteenth century. The analysis is conducted through an examination of architectural and urban spatial aspects of the transformation of urban landscape, in the larger context of shifting dominant cultures and social structures. Thus, crucial to this work is the analysis of the transformation of the urban landscape of Belgrade in the nineteenth century. It is a process that took place in step with indicators of social, economic, cultural and business development of the city, and through a historical succession of organizational forms of local and state governance. The nineteenth century social make up of Belgrade was considerably different from the late eighteenth century. It comprised three main groups: the community of Serbs from the Principality of Serbia and other parts of the Ottoman Empire, Serbs from the Habsburg Empire, that is, from Austria-Hungary, and the representatives of the centuries long present mercantile and artisanal community of Belgrade, mostly Aromanians and Greeks, but also Turks, Serbs, Jews, Armenians, and others. In the historical transformation of the city in the nineteenth century, these three most numerous groups formed a new amalgamated city culture that reflected the political tumult in Belgrade and Serbia. The transformation period in question can be divided into several phases. The first phase is the initial period, from 1791 to 1815, bearing the first indications of transformation. The second lasted until 1867, and the third phase of the process lasted to the First World War. This study examines the transformation of viii Belgrade’s urban landscape through a number of architectural and urban spatial indicators of change: a) the city limits (the initial outline and enlargement of the city district and region), b) natural surroundings (change in land use, shift in relationship of the city to its environment, the mode and scope of formation of green surfaces within the city, the prevalence and types of private and public greenery in the city), and c) the built environment: urban regulations (transformation of size, shape, functional characteristics and relationships among lots, streets, blocks), but also systems of infrastructure for utilities and sanitation (such as the distribution of the water and sewer system, street lighting, public transportation, laying of telegraph and telephone cables, organizing metropolitan sanitary services). The collection, classification and analysis of relevant data regarding the transformation of Belgrade in the given period, comparison of their qualitative characteristics and specific measurable expressions in the defined time frame, the consideration of urban development through primary sources (city plans and documents related to city maps, photographs, architectural and urban projects, laws, theoretical and critical studies in the field of architecture and urban studies, and city records of the period) ‒ the main thrust of the research was directed at determining the scope of change that took place, identification of the most important actors and events within the transformation process, and revealing their relations. Broadly speaking, the main theoretical and methodological premises of the research are based on Henri Lefebvre's unitary theory and science of space, as elaborated in the introduction of his 1974 book La production de l'espace [The Production of Space]. Further, the study adopts the theoretical framework from Lefebvre's examination of the urban phenomenon, as set in La Rčvolution urbaine, [The Urban Revolution], 1970, and in his essay on political space, “Reflexions sur la politique de l’espacež [Reflections on the Politics of Space], also from 1970. The theoretical insights regarding third space, which follow from Lefebvre's unitary theory, and are elaborated in Edward W. Soja’s 1996 book Thirdspace: Journeys to Los Angeles and Other Real-and-Imagines Spaces are the starting point of considering the historical transformation of urban landscape, seen also through the premises of simultaneous spatiality, historicality, and sociality of human ix activity. The dissertation shows the expressions of transformation of Belgrade’s landscape in its phases through the architectural and urban studies' aspect of various levels of spatiality, meaning in levels that correspond to various stages of accomplishment of transformation, through perceived, conceived, and lived, or third, space. The narrower theoretical framework of this dissertation is set through the definition and consideration of cultural landscape as given by Carl Sauer, that is, the insights into the spatial transformation of the natural environment through human activity. The thesis is further anchored in the concept of taking the city to be part of a broader “space of circulationž, as defined by Michel Foucault in his thinking about the “apparatus of securityž and the creation of the modern administrative state, presented in, among other texts, Sčcuritč, territoire, population: Cours au Collège de France, 1977-1978 [Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1977-78], 2004. The narrower theoretical framework of the dissertation also includes considerations of various aspects of perceiving and constructing the complex phenomenon of the landscape, including urban landscape, and interpreting the history of the urban landscape, meaning its limits, archetypes, internal dichotomies. One of the methods this research uses is that of historical interpretation of insights arrived at in the domain of architectural and urban studies of space. The research shows that there was indeed a transformation of the urban landscape of Belgrade in the nineteenth century, that this process was driven for the most part by the paradigm of the modern European city, and that the protagonists of the transformation were the bearers of political and economic power following the patterns of capitalist development of state and social structure. In addition, one of the directions of activities ‒ the result of which was the transformation of the Belgrade landscape ‒ emerged through the action performed on space by society as a whole. Nineteenth century Belgrade transformed according to the model of the modern capitalist city. This was the case even in the negative sense of such development, particularly true in the last phase of the given period, leading to residential squalor, a lack of inner city greenery, insufficient utilities’ infrastructure (given the spatial distribution of the x inhabitants), with the typical result of the appearance of communicable diseases, etc. Conversely, unlike the urbanization of other large industrial cities of Europe, Belgrade did not suffer large scale residential squalor, or the ensuing epidemics of transmittable diseases, nor were there revolutionary uprisings of the poorest layers of society, or a constant possibility of the escalation of discontent of the city poor. The dissertation research further shows that the transformation of the urban landscape of Belgrade in the nineteenth century also took place in the field of architectural and urban culture, characterized, apart from the transformed expressions of the built city environment, by the typical intellectual and spiritual expressions of the process, among which the creation of a new “livedž, third space. The questions this thesis raises deal mostly with the considerations of the significance of the expression of cultural practices in space during the process of transformation of an urban landscape from an Ottoman to a European or capitalist city. In that sense, a host of other questions are brought up regarding the urban landscape of Belgrade, that is, regarding possible interpretations of its transformations in time.