The starting goal of the paper is the research on the natural, historical and cultural preconditions for the origins, development and shaping the Serbian spa architecture in the period from 1830 to 1940. The obtained results clear the path for determining the basic reciprocal connections and influences of historical, social and cultural circumstances and modernisation processes in the country on this type of architecture. An insight into its development and construction sheds light on the roles of the state and its agencies, organised groups of stakeholders and private clients in this process, as well as on the impact of certain architects on the spa complexes and buildings shape characteristics. The spa, climatic and health resorts are settlements that originated in the areas of special natural characteristics and with clearly designed facilities. In the 1830s, after conducting extensive research in natural resources, the state started shaping a legal framework for the spas structuring, construction and improvement, then enforcing its provisions and implementing the key guidelines on the architectural development. In the 19th and the first half of the 20th centuries, the Ministry of Building civil servants were important and eminent builders, talented architects of various generations, expressing their particular styles and artistic forms. The available sources and the material gathered during the field investigations brought to light the works of some little-known architects, along with some unknown works of the eminent ones. In addition, private clients’ and physicians’ requirements had their significant role in creating style trends in the spa architecture, so they also became a subject of the research. Furthermore, it has been ascertained how architectural elements from the Central European spas were brought to Serbia during the process of Europeanisation and modernisation, which was followed by a fast paced industrialisation, urbanisation and traffic development. All that brought new forms and rules of social life and new models of civil conduct. Since the architecture of the Serbian spas has not been a subject of any particular, extensive and detailed research so far, this paper now brings forth a scholarly well-documented interpretation of its origins and development and VI accentuates the most important buildings and values so as to facilitate the valorisation of its place in the overall architecture of the studied period. Therefore, the conducted investigations, research, valorisation and historiographic analysis in architecture are the grounds for establishing the guidelines for further development and utilisation of the spa architecture from the aspect of cultural and natural heritage conservation and sustainable development. This paper aims at being an incentive and a starting point to other academic fields for establishing directions of development and activities towards a better use of the spa natural resources and architectural properties as an economic potential.