Thе thesis explores the transformation of industrial urban space in Skopje in the post-socialist period. More specifically, the paper studies the industrial space transformation, i.e. the intensive spatial restructuring of production activities due to the effect of the processes of deindustrialization and reindustrialization, the emergence of new special forms of production activities and the new spatial distribution of industry. The research builds upon the statement that as a process, the transformation of industrial space in Skopje is similar to the one in cities of Central and Eastern Europe, where it resulted from the processes of economic restructuring, deindustrialization, globalization and tertiarization of the economy. Nevertheless, specifics that derive from the transition process, the low level of economic development and the position of Skopje within the global economic flows create precise and clear distinctions in the transformation process. The basic research hypotheses refer to the transformation of socialistic industrial space as characterized by a combination of continuity and change, and the location of new industrial activity resulting from the effects of processes of concentration and dispersion of production activities. Through the research of continuity and discontinuity in the development and distribution of industry and industrial areas in the city of Skopje, the tendencies of concentration and dispersion of industrial activities, the emergence of new spatial forms of production and economic activities, and the change of the spatial pattern of distribution of industry indicates that the predominant outcomes of transformation of the industrial space are vii locations of abandoned industries (change) and that the dispersed distribution of industrial activities beyond the urban boundaries of the city play a greater role in directing the new distribution of industry. The contribution of the research is twofold. The first set of research results confirm, in the case of the city of Skopje, the correlation between the transformation of the space and the development of society within the framework of general theoretical discourse of restructuring the production space in the socialist city, with transition of the economy and changes in the political and social system. The second set of research results point to the potential and importance of existing and newly established industrial areas for future spatial and economic development of the city. Drawing on the theoretical and empirical knowledge of local issues, practical responses in the field of architectural design and urban planning can be offered. This is based on the premise that industrial planning and design should be based on a comprehensive real urban process, which will take into account the effect of the historical,economic and geopolitican context. As well as social and ecological issues. From an urban-architectural perspective, it should be paramount the future development of the city to offer opportunities for renewal and construction within the existing urban context and complex ecological environment in order to achieve the desired sustainable development of the city.