This doctoral dissertation offers an observation of the urban space phenomena through the cinematic lens as a trial to testing and verification of the cinematic aspect of architecture. Beside the essential contribution to the contemporary theory of architecture, this research has attempted to discover the operational function of the cinematic aspect of architecture within the theoretical and methodological framework of the contemporary architectural design methodology. The research goes well beyond the traditional view of architecture to appoint it art - the art of shaping space. It is this framework that enables architecture to propel a review of perceptual principles, the experience of architectural space, and to open up a relationship between the concept of movement and the design elements and principles of both film and architecture. By providing an imaginative manipulation of space, perception, program configurations and visuality, architecture, like any other art, adopts its own value and relationship to the world. The dissertation offers one possible view of the consequences of such manipulations arising after the cinematic apparatus exerted an influence on the transformation of the spatial conceptions into a cinematic event. Dealing with modifications of the perception of space, visual and imaginative discoveries of filmmakers and architects is a focal research interest in terms of the didactic and educational motivator and the reassessment of architectural practice. Spatial context of the cinematic aspect of architecture was dramatically challenged by ongoing changes in contemporary architectural discourse which can be traced and investigated by harmonization of the relationship between architecture and film with their methodological and didactic approaches. This dissertation indicates various effects of the relationship between architecture and film, demonstrates points of their connection and attaches them to the current state of contemporary architectural discourse which was labeled by concept of movement, transformability, as well as to the manifestation of these phenomena. Launching of an innovative approach to the contemporary architectural design strategy was conditioned by the interpretation XVI of these phenomena through a concept of architecture. After verifying the cinematic aspect of architecture that provided general conclusions about the relationship between the two disciplines, this research continued by investigating into a potential innovation in the theoretical and methodological framework of architectural design. The research has shown significant results in the possibility to improve and upgrade the established values of urban practices, precisely, Cullen`s urban strategy. A theoretical extension to the Cullen`s urban study was made possible through the definition of elements and operable principles mobilized through the theoretical concept of serial vision. Then we posit that, guided by visual perception and external concepts drawn from the arts, the contemporary theory of architecture and cinematics, the spatial development of events, directed movements and activities, can be pre-designed, positioned and controlled from a new perspective of the architectural design methodology, building upon the predetermined strategies of serial vision. Due to the complexity of the problem implicit by the above premise, the process is broken down into stages where each stage operates by connecting and testing possible theoretical positions. The phases also seek to address the question of monitoring an impact which the current changes in contemporary architectural discourse certainly made by the transformed concept of space. Experiments were performed by connecting chosen theoretical principles originally made by Cullen with the theoretically defined cinematic principles. Their role in return is to enable the implementation of identified knowledge1 through the contemporary architectural design methodology. In the first part of this dissertation, we approached the contextualization of the conceptual research framework by asking how to position a research model in order to enable the interpretation of impact from the film and cinematic practices to architectural practice. Theoretical and historical overview of modernity and postmodernity allowed us to understand film as a critical source of the raising questions on the concept of space in architecture, while the results presented from interviews provided a fundamental starting point to the interpretation of the filmmaker`s practice with the elaboration of the consequential impact it exerts on architectural practice. Pointing to the inseparability of the two disciplines by the 1 General methodological approach to this research was considered in regards to an acknowledged tendency of architectural discourse to improve the epistemological basis of the design process. In its interdisciplinary positioning among related visual art disciplines, architecture was determined in attention to the interpretive and contextual nature of knowledge. XVII instrumentalization of visual phenomena that connects them, has led to a claim that architectural and urban spaces may have cinematic qualities that are evident in everyday passive perception of urban space. Due to the complexity of this phenomenon, it was necessary to understand the true nature of architectural space identified through the cinematic perspective, and that is why we approached the theoretical identification of fundamental cinematic concepts and the qualities of architectural space. In the second part of the dissertation, the focus is placed on testing how to apply the identified knowledge in the architectural design methodology. The second focal point is to trace theoretical implications of the supplemented knowledgebase in the contemporary architectural discourse that overcomes insufficient connection between theory and practice. In search of an answer, links were pointed between chosen cinematic principles and the fundamental Cullen’s urban study theoretical postulates so as to perform the experimental theoretical connections. The operation models were also separated from this process. Our intention to pursue with the application of these operation models in architectural design strategy was followed by an adaptation of spatial and operating devices2 in the process. Evaluation of the results from the experiment which incorporates the innovative operating device the practice of walking and cinematic image creation, provided conditions for testing the cinematic aspect of architecture in the third part of the dissertation. The experiment in the concluding part of the thesis unfolds the issue of transiting to the cinematic research model in the established interdisciplinary framework. Conducting this experiment in the interdisciplinary framework has made it possible to detect specific areas of artistic implications in architecture, and was demonstrated through the application of cinematic device to the problems of interpretation and abstraction. In this ‘design as research’ context which replaces pure design approach, the methods, possibilities and effects of the application of film montage strategies and editing techniques on the conceptualization of space in architecture were explored. In order to regulate the concept, structure and integrity of the architectural entity observed through the cinematic lens the identified operating and spatial devices, instruments and tools integrated in the architectural design methodology, were examined through a case study of "Key of the Game - The Conquest 2 The second focal point was to trace the theoretical implications of supplemented knowledge base which is done in the context of contemporary architectural discourse that overcomes insufficient connection between theory and practice. Looking for the possibilities to reconnect chosen cinematic principles with the theoretical postulates derived from Cullen`s urban study, results in performing the experimental theoretical connections as part of the research process. The operationalization models were also separated from this process. Our intention to pursue with the application of the operationalization models in architectural design was followed by an adaptation of spatial and operating devices in the process. XVIII of Belgrade Fortress"3. The chapter was concluded by the methodical transitioning among architectural theory, film and architectural design practice, in order to еstablish the conceptual research framework and the knowledge base determined in relation to pursuing an artistic experiment in architecture. Following a speculation upon the outcome of this experiment, a verification of the basic research hypothesis that а contemporary concept of architectural design essentially requires an "open" approach, was supported by the integration of Foucault's method and a proposal of the redefined Architectural Design Scenario, both making part of a new research paradigm in architecture. Contrary to the research which has been developed so far across Europe and beyond, through the interpretation of architectural representations in film, this research has offered a perspective that has not yet been discussed in the national or international scientific publications. The difference in relation to the previous and current research lies in a comprehensive analysis that begins by examining the possibilities of applying the basic strategy and techniques of filmmaking into architecture. These issues then run the key theoretical and practical positions by linking the fields of architecture, film and cinematic practices and recognize cinematic effects as the essential quality of architectural space and cinematic concepts as well as identify basic cinematic principles. Furthermore, they define for the first time the possibility of implementing the results achieved through architectural design in the poststructuralist perspective of postmodern discursive environment today. This difference stemmed from the aim set at the start of the study, which refers to the analysis of the creative phase in question and the disassembly of the complex conceptualization process characteristic in the architectural design methodology. In this regard, question is open as to how the conceptual elements of montage film strategy and editing technique have been used as a methodological tool for testing the cinematic aspect of architecture through the fundamental elements of architectural design methodology. The hypotheses have not caused the development of research in the direction of a display and formation of architectural elements of the movie scenes through the elements of design which support the simulation of reality analogous to that of a film scene (research performed at European and International research institutes), but in terms of defining what impact the film 3 International PhD workshop, Postgraduate Academic Program (2010) – Doctoral studies, Faculty of Architecture – University of Belgrade; supervisor: prof. Branko Pavić, participant prof. Dejan Miljković, guest teacher: Korean artist Kang Woohyun. XIX production procedures might excert through architectural design practice, in terms of similarities between film and architecture functions (for example the functions of detection, depending on the context, continuity, vision / the interpretation of the outside world, etc.). Then the research was applied to the interpretation of architectural and urban scenarios, testing the mechanism of perception and the potential reconfiguration of reality from the unique capabilities offered by the relations between the identified process of architectural design and filmmaking. The debated theoretical and methodological issues form the basis for the act of reconnecting theoretical positions in architecture, film and visual arts. These are substantially based on the current changes in contemporary architectural research and practice, which are neither associated to the theoretical viewpoints nor harmonized with the design strategies and research devices. The relationship between architecture and film has begun with the technological innovation that brought moving images in the early twentieth century. But concepts, strategies and techniques exchanged throughout the century made this relationship rich to date. The exchanged devices newly reconfigured their systems of knowledge. By showing traveling routes through locations and a spatio-visual desire that aspires to motion, early films anticipated "panoramic views" which would later be attached to the concept of circulation to get fully embedded in the design principles of modern architecture (Giuliana Bruno, 2002). The elaboration of these issues will enact a theorist in the field of cultural studies, Giuliana Bruno, to introduce the importance of describing the simulation of movement through space of the cinematic representations which are never static. In that sense, we might compare the status of cinematic representation which itself aspires to motion and the prediction of spatial configurations which might evoke the true nature of spatial experience - one that requires its realization through the movement of the spatial subject. This comparison has allowed us to realize the potential which the architectural practice and education have in substantially enriching the established methodological standpoints by invoking the operation devices of both disciplines to aspire motion. Likewise, by gaining insight into current urban debates through the eyes of practitioners in the field of filmmaking and architectural design and examples of architectural representation of the early years of the twentieth century, it was revealed that architecture was specifically inspired by moving images in numerous ways. The impact that moving images had on architecture in promoting Modernism became part of the quest to discover new architectural research tools which would serve to XX examine their impact on the viewer`s perception. Later in the twentieth century, The Situationist International of the sixties will demonstrate a broader application of the moving images in architecture. This was made possible from the analysis of what we recognize today as a precursor of cinematic conceptual models in the existing urban practice, in accordance with the focal settings to an architectural imagination. Architectural imagination was set to operate on framing and the spatial alignment of sequences of frames, thereby forming the projected actions of subjects in urban space. The specificity of this turnover is reflected in a series of architectural research works to date, which show an important change in the observation of urban space as it starts to be conceived as a visual apparatus and a movement-based system. This approach enables architecture to be perceived as a sequence of events or a series of shots instead of a unique articulation, and urban space to be experienced through transformation, duration and transience. As such, space becomes a place of embodied visual consumption with a potential to recognize certain urban phenomena that would otherwise remain hidden, and therefore the potential in rethinking the spatial quality and concepts remain untapped. Accordingly, we explored the future vision of urban space that includes the movement of subjects in space - the aspect which we believe to be fundamental to consider in relation to the application of contemporary design methods in architecture. The aspect of movement includes a number of potentials such as a change in contemporary perception supported by the use of new technologies of modernity and space, then panoramas, dioramas and finally film. In that sense, our research was based largely on spatial and temporal management in process-driven architecture and bourgeois rhetoric of fluidity and flow. Basic research hypotheses derived from this expanded interest in architecture, in terms of processes, one that cease to serve traditional conventions or modes of representation and production and which, through the mediation of innovative technologies, encourages more cinematic inclusion of the subject in space. The history of architecture witnesses a direct influence of the representational formula on the modification of architectural practice. Yet their suppression to the background and decomposition through the correspondent phases of the design process today still significantly mitigated the effect on the production of architectural concepts. Moreover, it influenced the guidance to theoretical and practical experimenting in architecture with the new experience of space, based on analogy with the spatial sequence of a cinematic route that guides the filmmaker. XXI Research methodology was adjusted to the indicated research questions, hypothesis, subject and aims. This research permeated several theoretical debates and issues raised in practice as potentially conflicting discourses which require clear reconnection of the existing theoretical and practical standpoints. Entering a discussion of the postmodern and changes in relation to modernism and visual culture throughout the century, this discursive field has embodied fundamental theoretical standpoints which serve to determine a methodological approach to this research: poststructuralist discourse, an ever-widening of epistemological issues and the introduction of external concepts from the theory of architecture, arts, cinematics and visual culture. From the standpoint of aims and objectives, one of the most important methods employed in this research, the case study, was presented as part of the experiment in the third part of this dissertation. Moving its focus away from the issues of representation, it brought a way of conceiving epistemology that is less confining and substantially intellectually richer. In this ever-widening discursive arena within the pervasive detailed theoretical analysis that was used to rethink architectural design strategy, the use of this method has indeed suggested a need for reordering the importance of the visual register that would potentially induce the adoption of new research devices within architectural design practice. Means of experimentations were introduced to launch a fluidity of ideas and expand the forms of knowledge in dismantling of the very act of architectural designing as the place of interest, with results which would exceed the expectations. For this reason, the most important methods within the case study include methodological and scientific aspects within its function and are able to, in various ways, reach the artistic aspects, either in an intuitive way or directly from the reassessment of design strategies whose techniques balance among science, art and practice. In order to act properly in the conceptual research framework research by design4, the entire procedure requires the harmonization of scientific methods and the design practice, as well as the alignment of different 4 Application of the ‘research by design’ method was initiated in the field of creative arts, substantially in the writings of the practice-based research conceptual framework (Sullivan, 2005). ’Research by design’ in architecture includes methodological and scientific aspects and can, in various ways, reach the artistic aspects of architecture, the intuitive or the concrete. At the beginning of the 21st century, it was considered one of the most influential methodological research at architectural schools across Europe and beyond, especially within a group of artistic research projects. The method is approved to be applicable in architecture, provided that its techniques successfully balance between science, art and practice. In the presented doctoral research, primary focus is set to examine architectural design strategies within the contemporary architectural discourse, and ‘research by design’ was implemented in order to map transformations of the design process when applying new procedures, tools and operating devices. XXII forms of knowledge created in the interdisciplinary discursive arena. Furthermore, by interpreting different types of knowledge the whole design process has turned into a kind of architectural experimentation. The results of this research are applicable through the conceptual framework of practice-based research5, architectural design methodology and through the widening of existing theoretical traditions. The uniqueness of this research consists of multiple aspects. Beside a possibility to offer an extensive knowledgebase of current architectural theory, film and design practice, it has the ability to extend our current talk about the conceptual continuity of urban space within the existing architectural and urban debates, and argue to achieve this idea by activating cinematic strategies, research techniques and procedures to conceptually affect the practical rearrangement of urban space. A change occurred in the perception of contemporary urban space that marks the dominant debates of contemporary architectural discourse, contextualizes a paradigm shift to a more dynamic urban space of unrestrainable flow in a permanent state of change, relativized all our truly important contextual discussion to date. The direction of research that encourages the observation of urban space through the cinematic lenses opened up for a possibility to divide the course of research into two separate development flows. First, in terms of a speech on devices of the spatial continuity as a new conceptual tool, when presenting an urban space that was spatially and visually fully identically treated through architectural and urban principles. In other words, the task was to find a way to reduce the importance of the dichotomy street space – plot space at the expense of the registered movements in urban space, and thus to enable the creation of "total dynamism" at the basis of designing a constantly modeled and remodeled urban structure. The research has practically proven that the experience of urban space continuity corresponded to the cinematographic continuity reconstructed by spatial means, which had been previously theoretically established in the writings of a film director, Dziga Vertov. Spatial continuity becomes a powerful tool in the hands of filmmakers who enabled the dynamic position of the observer and the active modification of the process of observation, due to the potential to build a 5 Concluded with a series of latest research results in the practice-based conceptual framework, presented at the Research into Practice Conferences (2000-2008). Take a detailed look in the paper presented by Jill Franz (Faculty of Architecture - University of Queensland in Brisbane, Australia) at the Research into Practice Conference (2000), published in: Franz, J. (2000) An interpretative framework for practice-based research in architectural design, Working papers in Art & Design, VOL 1 – “The Foundations of Practice-based researchž, http://www.herts.ac.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0020/12287/WPIAAD_vol1_franz.pdf , accessed 20th March 2013. XXIII spatial flow which remains the primary factor in a film narrative. Second, in terms of strengthening the relationship between architecture and the moving image projected in urban space, we start conceiving the city in terms of a visual apparatus and begin to measure the effect which a system of still and moving images leave as the consequent conceptual transformation of urban space. It turned out to be challenging and interesting to observe the city not as compact and coherent urban fabric but as a "mere coexistence" – as "a series of relationships between objects which are almost never articulated in a visual and formal sense. These relationships are no longer defined by architectural connections" and this makes a clear indication of urban relationships which are not based on visual continuity, but on ruptures, incoherencies, fragmentation and complementarities. Through disconnection, disruption and inherited methodological arrogance in the culture of urban connections recognized by the postulates of urban practice such as the Situationist International from the mid of the 20th century or the current architectural practice of Bernard Tschumi and Daniel Libeskind, it was demonstrated that exploring the cinematic aspect of architecture with the extension of the existing methodological foundation, provided a practice for overcoming the identified negative connotations of urban space.