The survey of characteristics of residential buildings of Belgrade represents a pre-requisite for a comprehensive assessment of the state of the domestic housing stock, its qualities or flaws, and the basis for the conclusion of what we actually have and what are the further courses of action. The subject of this dissertation is to explore the building structures of residential buildings of Belgrade and their further evaluation from the standpoint of comfort or residence. The study was focused on everything that in a material sense makes a building structure (construction, elements of building envelope, partition elements and finalization) and their impact on achieving requirements of comfort. Taking into account that the timelines in which the Belgrade housing stock was produced is set in the range of 150 years, typical time periods were established in relation to building achievements relevant for the given time. This approach was aimed at structuring extensive professional material and typological positioning of what constitutes a representative sample. Within the observed period, typical structures were identified and systematized, characteristics in building were observed and building regulations were investigated, which served as the basis for the formation of representative models and their structure. On such established models, analysis of quality of living comfort was conducted, including: thermal, acoustic, and visual comfort, as well as indoor air quality. The next step in the research is the definition of relevant parameters of each individual comfort and the formation of the methodology that will be used for testing of established models of housing construction. The fact that every aspect of the comfort is subject of a unique specialization or profession caused different methodological procedures and a multidisciplinary research. The parameters are chosen so that for each category of requirements measurable results are obtained, enabling an objective evaluation. With the help of computer tools which are specialized for particular categories of the comfort (thermal, sound and light), representative models are explored and results are obtained, on the basis of which the conclusions about the quality of residential building in Belgrade are drawn. Results are structured by categories of comfort and then summarized by individual models, in order to consider the characteristics of each sample comprehensively, to perform synthesized valorisation, and formulate conclusions on the established chronological unities.