The doctoral dissertation examines the possibilities for improving the model of social housing in Belgrade and for introducing innovative mechanisms and instruments, in line with the new paradigms of urban planning and project design, in order to achieve higher quality of housing conditions and services. The dissertation subject presumes, on the one side, the establishment of correlations between the concepts and the definitions of sustainable social housing, which make the integral part of the housing policy of a socially responsible state, and, on the other side, the analytical examination of the principles of sustainable development and their application in urban planning and project design practices. The research reveals the problem of the existing, still underdeveloped model of social housing in Serbia, characterized by a partial set up of the legal and institutional framework, with no real financial mechanisms and human resources, and a stringent market for placement, testing and evaluation of social housing. The existing model is significantly unrelated to the housing needs of the population, and encumbered with the problems of urbanization, increasing poverty, including the energy poverty, negative impacts on the environment, marginalization and reduced social cohesion and inclusion of social housing recipients, etc. Improvement of the existing model of social housing to the sustainable one, involves the establishment of a new approach in social housing, which comprehensively considers the possibility of introducing innovations in urban planning and project design, which are based on all three aspects of sustainability – social, economic and environmental aspects. In that sense, the focus of the dissertation research is centred on the analysis and discussion of the considered aspects that are important for the sustainability of the model – the legal and institutional, socio-economic and technological aspects of the social housing. The analysis of these aspects has been conducted for Europe and Serbia, with the aim of defining criteria and indicators for the investigation and determination of a sustainable model of social housing for the City of Belgrade. IV Furthermore, the thesis presents the analysis of the experiences of sustainable models of social housing from selected countries of the European Union. We analyzed the experiences of the City of Vienna, the City of Ljubljana and the City of Malmö, with their innovative and sustainable solutions that pave the way not only for the development of social housing in these respective countries, but far beyond. Since Serbia has not yet developed the adequate model of social housing, its practice of social housing faces a number of constraints. In addition to establishment and completion of the legal and institutional framework, the development and extension of financing mechanisms’ possibilities, a major challenge in the setting up of a sustainable model of social housing in Serbia is the creation of a methodology of urban planning and project design for social housing in accordance with contemporary standards and technical- technological innovations. In order to establish an improved model of social housing in Belgrade, the primary literature on the built and planned social housing for the period 2003 – to date has been collected, and research, analysis and classification of implemented programs and projects of social housing in Belgrade have been conducted. In determining the improved model of social housing, the criteria and specific indicators have been established, linked to the three pillars of sustainability – social, economic and environmental sustainability. By applying the established criteria and indicators, the evaluation of the model of social housing already in place in Belgrade has been provided, while the knowledge, assumptions and elements were offered to improve and innovate new models of social housing that could be integrated into future projects of social housing construction in Belgrade, but also in other cities in Serbia. Special attention has been brought to the experimental investigation of influences of design and of the selection of applied energy system to energy concept of the social housing building in Belgrade. The dissertation deals with all the inherent assumptions and elements of sustainable social housing as an instrument for enhancing social inclusion and cohesion, achieving better quality of housing conditions and services, fighting against poverty and energy poverty, environmental protecting and developing and promoting the use of renewable energy sources.