This research focuses on process of defining methodological principles for regeneration of abandoned railway corridors in the Republic of Srpska and their usage potential. Abandoned industrial railway corridors represent a special category of brownfield areas and thus require a special treatment within the urban renewal process. Primary goal of this research is to determine the most appropriate method for urban renewal of such areas. The brownfield sites phenomenon and various urban renewal methods were explored, by analyzing the available literature and by critical analysis of the content, in pursuit of the most appropriate method for urban regeneration of brownfield sites. The research has shown that the urban regeneration method was the subject of research of many authors and that it includes the brownfield renewal process that could have positive effects on the ecological, economic and social aspects of life. Therefore, the most appropriate method for urban renewal of such areas is the urban regeneration method, which can offer the most acceptable concepts for renewal while preserving the identity of a location, thus confirming the first hypothesis of the research. The second part of this research consists of the epistemic and phronetic organizational research directed towards defining methodological principles for regeneration of abandoned railway corridors, which is the second goal of this research. In fact, research in domain of architecture and urbanism explore science, as well as research objects and their contexts, and is more effective when its methodologies are based on a combination of 'pure knowledge' (episteme) and 'practical wisdom' (phronesis). Epistemic organizational research includes the analysis of the theoretical background and current scientific knowledge within the concept of sustainability (environmental, economic and social), and the epistemic methodological principles for regeneration of abandoned railway corridors were defined based on the strategies of the chosen theories. Phronetic organizational research is based on individual descriptions of particular case studies of successful abandoned railway corridors regeneration processes and their comparative analysis, and it was the basis for defining the phronetic methodological principles for regeneration of abandoned railway corridors. A comparative analysis of the epistemic and phronetic methodological regeneration principles has shown that the conjunction of the episteme and phronesis contributes to having a broader set of VIII methodological principles for regeneration of abandoned railway corridors, which confirms the second hypothesis. The third part of the research refers to the applied research examining the usability and validity of the methodological principles for regeneration of abandoned railway corridors in the Republic of Srpska, which is the third goal of the research. First was given an explanation of the current situation in the Republic of Srpska regarding identification, mapping, status and renewal of brownfield locations, based on analysis of the available literature and critical content analysis, with particular emphasis placed on abandoned railway corridors. That was followed by field researches conducted with application of in situ method on six industrial polygons located in areas of three cities/municipalities in the Republic of Srpska (Banja Luka, Prijedor and Novi Grad). The industrial railway corridors where mapped by analyzing the state of facts and the mapping was done in the form of catalog cards, a modern instrument for brownfield mapping, after which the usability and validity of the methodological principles for regeneration of abandoned railway corridors where tested and guidelines for renewal of these areas were defined. This indicates that the defined principles constitute reference recommendations for process of planning of abandoned railway corridors renewal, which confirms the third hypothesis. This research has a dual impact because it explores the subject which is deemed contemporary from both scientific and practical viewpoint. The scientific impact of the research refers to the synthesis of the relevant knowledge within the subject area, its modification by new scientific information and development of the theoretical and methodological approach for formulation of principles for regeneration of abandoned railway corridors. The practical impact of the research refers to the prospect of applying the methodological regeneration principles to specific polygons of abandoned railway corridors for purpose of finding realistic solutions for their renewal, as well as to adequately contemplate problems and potentials of the abandoned railway corridors in the process of urban and architectural planning and designing. Based on everything presented above it can be concluded that this research represents a foundation for further research directed towards creating strategies, concepts and regulations for process of regeneration of abandoned railway corridors in the Republic of Srpska, for there is a necessity to provide new regulations for renewal of such locations on this territory. Therefore, the methodological principles for regeneration of abandoned railway corridors defined in this research could be used as the basis for defining new legislative documents. Also, harmonization of urban planning documentation with the methodological principles for IX regeneration of abandoned railway corridors is a method that would enable achieving the best results in practice. This research can also be used as a foundation for planning, designing and implementation of green corridors, an unavoidable concept in contemporary architectural and urban practice.