This thesis explores the contemporary urban recreation and its use as a tool for urban development. Based on integrative capacity of recreation as an urban activity, the aim of the research was to examine possibilities to use this asset in development of Serbian cities. Since the existing concept of recreation development in Serbia doesn‟t acknowledge its possible use as a tool for urban development, thesis aims to redefine the concept of recreation so that it can be implemented in Serbian context. For that reason the research was organized on two levels. At the first level the integrative role of recreation was examined through research in urban theory and in the fields of psychology, sociology and geography of leisure. Integrative capacity of urban recreation was defined through concepts of leisure experience, encounter and practice and as such operationalized as fluid, focal and porous integrative practice. Different possibilities for activating integrative potential of urban recreation were identified for autonomous and integrated forms of urban recreation. The occurrence and spreading of the phenomena of integrated recreation is then explained and its integrative capacity explored through comparative analysis of eight concepts of development through recreation: „city of fun“, „fantasy city, „tourist city“, „experience city“, „city of play“, „healthy/active city“, „green city“ and „creative city“. The aim was to identify possibilities and constraints of each mode of urban development. The characteristics of each concept of development through recreation were mapped on hypothetical model of contemporary city so that a new „landscape of integrated recreation“ can be identified. The results have proved that various developent paths enabled recreation to function as an integrative tool for urban development at different levels, in various forms and on many locations in the city. These results formed the basis for redefining a concept of recreation in Serbia and for developing a model for integrating urban structure through development of recreation opportunities in urban space. This conceptual model connects the process of production of recreational space, characteristics of recreational spatial situations and their possible integrative effects on urban structure. The new concept of integrated recreation was developed by taking into account specificis of Serbian cities and particular social, economical, political and cultural conditions in which they develop. The implementation of the concept of integrated recreation was explored by using the city of Belgrade as a case study. The content analysis of four main planning documents and stategies for city development showed that basis for using recreation as a tool for urban development exists, but that there are many restrictions for the implementation. At the other hand, we have shown that in practice various forms of integrated recreation can be identified, but that there are not connected with official planning system. Finnaly, the analysis of the role that integrated recreation played in re-development of Belgrade central waterfront on the Sava river showed that through spatial fragments and in form of urban tactic, recreation can be used as a tool for urban developemnt in Serbian cities.