The practice of resolving the issues of socially endangered Roma housing is a process
developing through the interaction of the theoratical and the practical, situated outside
the design profession in the concept of the contemporary society as multicultural. The
lack of knowledge on the Roma lifestyle and housing principles causes a lack of
methods and techniques to choose and develop the designs for adequate housing. The
intent of this paper is to present how several basic interdependent characteristics of the
functional organization of Romanipen based Roma communities represent the ethos of
the formation of spatial structures and construction methods in unplanned Roma
settlements in Belgrade, using a deeper understanding of the Roma housing principles.
Тhe paper starts with the broader interpretation of territorialization which suggests the
existence of a relation between the spatial and the social level of Roma settlements; a
relation that makes possible the understanding of what this cultural group produces in
space. The physical spatial patterns of informal Roma settlements were created without
professionals’ influence and represent a quality induced by the need to functionally
organize a community where everyday activities take place. Therefore, the
characteristics of spatial organization and construction methods in unplanned Roma
settlements are the actual object of research when examining a collective lifestyle as the
dominant pattern in everyday behavior determined by concrete Romanipen principles.
The subject of the paper is focused on recognizing spatial expressions of two different
degrees of Belgrade Romani collectives – the family and the community – in select
settlements which constitute a representative sample due to their intra-settlement
structures. Further on, the paper compares research results – a systematic overview of
characters of physical structures and construction principles – with the preliminary
framework of possibilities supported by existing, valid documents in order to express
and classify scientifically described facts on Romani housing as an operable database of
programmatic principles.
The purpose of the paper is firstly to emphasize the fact that the Roma
microenvironments already offer their own ways for participation in the creation of
cities of the future. Defining programmatic principles through this procedure has a dual
effect: it directs towards architectural and urban design of lifestyle conditions
acceptable to the Romani community; also, it enables the design actualization of
strategic principles for resolving housing for socially endangered Romani and,
methodologically, other culturally different groups as well.