Lighting has the crucial influence on the impression of ambience during the night. Until recently, high-quality ambient lighting was realized by the use of metal- halide lamps with a ceramic discharge tube, because their essential advantages (warm-white colour of light and excellent colour rendering) compared to other conventional light sources used in urban lighting contribute to adequate presentation of ambient characteristics and create pleasant atmosphere. During the last few years, LED lamps are promoted as the ideal solution for ambient lighting. Their small size, controlled light beam and the possibility of changing both the intensity and colour of light make them particularly suitable for architectural lighting. However, the question was raised whether LED lamps are also appropriate for ambient lighting, taking into account the characteristics of urban ambiences which should be emphasized and the effects to be achieved. While photometric, energy and economic indicators of the use of LED luminaires can be evaluated performing measurements or calculations, their other relevant characteristics, like colour appearance, colour rendering, subjective impression of glare, the sense of security and feeling of relaxation in an illuminated space, as well as the possibility of emphasizing elements and details, can only be assessed through an analysis of subjective impressions given by a number of respondents on each of these lighting aspects. Taking the above into account, the doctoral dissertation includes not only the verification of the objective (photometric, energy and economic) aspects, but also the evaluation of the subjective indicators regarding the quality of ambient lighting. The assessment of the subjective indicators was carried out through a pilot project realized on a pedestrian lane in a Belgrade park. In the dissertation, not only the ambient lighting quality factors, but also the characteristics of urban ambiences which should be emphasized by lighting, are viii presented. In addition, guidelines for ambient lighting are determined, based on the analyzed examples of the lighting solutions of squares, parks and pedestrian lanes. The analysis of the results of recent studies conducted on different continents, in which conventional and LED lighting installations were compared regarding various aspects of ambient lighting, helped to define a set of general requirements for such pilot projects. Accordingly, a pilot project, which involved 112 participants, dealt with the comparison of the subjective impressions of the respondents regarding the relevant characteristics of ambient lighting installations realized with LED and metal-halide luminaires. The results showed that the respondents found the conventional lighting installation better regarding all of the analyzed aspects. A possible explanation of the obtained results is that the LED spectrum, although continuously improving, still possesses an intensive radiation in the blue region, causing the use of metal-halide lamps (characterized by a practically continuous spectrum) more appropriate regarding both the colour appearance and colour rendering. Note that these lighting aspects, together with the elimination of glare, represent the key quality factors for the illumination of spaces where people stay for long periods of time. By statistical analysis of the obtained data, performed using the t-test for equality of means related to the case of dependent samples, it was concluded that the results for all of the questions from the survey could be considered statistically very significant or statistically significant. Also, an analysis of the survey results which included weighting factors showed that their effect is negligible in this case. In order to compare the objective (energy and economic) indicators of the quality of ambient lighting installations realized by LED and metal-halide luminaires, photometric calculations regarding the illumination of pedestrian lanes of various lighting classes were carried out (each of the analyzed lighting solutions fulfilled all ix photometric requirements imposed by the corresponding lighting class). Comparing the energy efficiency of the pedestrian lane lighting (the total installed power, i.e. the consumed electricity), as the objective indicator, it was concluded that energy savings of up to 35.5% could be achieved installing LED instead of metal-halide luminaires, as well as that there are situations in which electricity consumption was increased (up to 31.5%). In addition, by applying the generally accepted cost-discount method, the comparable lighting installations were economically evaluated. The analysis showed that some LED lighting solutions were up to 29.2% cheaper, but that expensive LED lighting solutions prevailed (the difference between the total actualized costs of the comparable LED and metal- halide lighting installations amounted up to 45.9%). Due to the technology of LED light production, as well as the fact that the fast development of the LED technology in terms of energy efficiency is not accompanied by significant improvements of the light spectrum, it is not expected that the LED technology will reach the spectrum quality of metal-halide lamps in the near future. Therefore, we believe that the application of metal-halide light sources will be justified in ambient lighting for years.