The purpose of this paper is to present the contribution to the development of the process of architectural design, with the aim to establish the role of the non-determined model in design of sustainable social housing. A sustainable aspect of social housing, reflected in cultural and social sustainability, was established after conducting comparative analysis of practical and normatively regulated aspects of social housing with contemporary tendencies applied through architectural and urban competition work. Based on these tendencies, the main problem of this research, manifested in the status of architecture of social housing as over-determined structure, has been defined. The research approach has been directed to recognize conventional access in architectural design of sustainable social housing as well as the potential of residental structure to overcome, by being used, the needs for which it was intially designed.In relation to problems identified, this research work is focused on defining the role of the models of non-determinedness in design process that can enable deliberation on specific problems between integrated levels of design process and project realization. This study consists four distinct parts. The first two parts have a theoretical character and are based on the method of personal argumentation and form information base by applying methods of analysis and systematization of primary and secondary material sources. The third part of the research is practical, methodologically carried out through a case study. The report of the case study includes the competition work process, conceptual design, urban plan and the production of the main project for mixed-use complex of social housing in Ovča. The design research is structured as an iterative decision-making process with involvement of various stakeholders and cooperation at different levels with: other winning teams, the city administration, the Agency for Housing, Urban Planning Institute and the Transportation Institute CIP which performed the detailed project design. This project offers an infrastructural system as a negotiating platform. Thus, the idea of changing the building-use program ceases to be a problem and becomes an integral part of the design strategy. VI The expected result is reflected in the outcomes of the process that will be applied in construction of regulations, positioning the infrastructural framework, opening of the design process as well as in the process of housing construction. The goal of this study is to establish the procedural practice for opening the design process when defining a minimum bar for negotiation of all participants in the project. By opening the design process, overcoming of the position that direct solutions to minimum conditions and structural pre-determinedness becomes possible. The potential of the platform is primarily in the iterative procedure that allows the feedback to be included in the process of design. Through mutual relations of all participants in the process, the social sustainability stabilizes, thereby offering a large number of solutions for one specific problem which achieves flexibility and enables a higher degree of quality and comfort of sustainable social housing