In the past few decades, building of energy efficient social housing real estates in the most developed EU countries has araised from singular experimantal projects to a very successful nascent course. The current development of the quality of social housing buildings is irrevocably moved towards improvement of its’ own energy efficiency. In the past few years, Serbia began to establish institutional and legislative framework for both energy efficiency of buildings and social housing matter for the first time since the failure of previous socialistic order. Although total dwellings of social housing stock in Serbia is almost brand new (since 2005), this research showed that energy performances of these buidings are below the new standards of energy efficiency (established in 2012) in Serbia. Research aim of this dissertation was to define what kind of building of energy efficient social housing real estates is appropriate for Serbia, regarding all relevant Serbian specifities. In order to do so, a new methodology based on forming, analysis and valuation of Materialisation Models has been developed and introduced in this dissertation. Energy efficiency of these Models is accomplished solely by architectural tools (such as: materialisation of thermal envelope and architectural form of the building), according to the competence of the architectural profession. On the basis of the previous analysis of serbian social housing stock – four representative building types (that are adequate for future social housing in Serbia) were defined, as well as the expected levels of energy efficiency, and according to this, a certain number of Materialisation Models were formed to represent these. Energy properties of the Models were calculated by a professional software in order to get exact values of their annual energy demand for heating, their energy class and the amount of CO emmission. After that, the 2 Models were compared and valuated on the basis of previously ascertained criteria. Thus, eighteen Materialisation Models were recognised to be the diapason of adequate future building solutions for energy efficient social housing in Serbia. In each specific case (at the very beginning of drafting and design of a social housing building), it is possible to find the optimal solution by choosing one of these eighteen Materialisation Models that has the most suitable energy properties for this specific location. The research results and the conclusions made in this dissertation were transformed into guideliness for the design of future energy efficient social housing buildings in Serbia. The concise methodology for forming, analysis and valuation of Materialisation Models that was established in this dissertation is not only applicable to social housing in Serbia, but is also applicable to any other building type in any other country.