The doctoral dissertation studies the relations between the concept and percept in architecture based upon the universal principles of the assemblage thinking initiated in philosophy by Guilles Deleuze and Fčlix Guattari, which was further improved and applied in different contexts within more transparent theories of Мanuel De Landa, Kim Dovey, etc. The place and becoming phenomena are used in order to investigate assemblage from different points of view and interprete it as a whole resulting from the interconnection among the constituents of the total being. In other words, instead of the essential dwelling upon the constituent parts of a whole, assemblange thoughts focus exclusively on the relations among them. Hence, the focal opinion is that assemblage is not a product of things but it is rather a product of their relations and connections, in which it is capable of an inner production of a new reality. One such inner capacity is recognized as the backbone of the prolific application of general assemblage ideas in the studies of the concept-percept relations in architecture. The observation of architecture as an assemblage of the concept and percept actually refers to the dislocation from the discourse dealing conception and perception separately into those discourses dealing with the interaction and connection among their intensive differences. Within one such context, a authoritative, monosemic focus of the architectural concept on the modalities of perception is lost. The focus is rather on the study of the emancipatory feature of architecture, in which process conception and perception are discussed exclusively via the symbiosis, i.e. the assemblage and their own capacities to be altered within it. The primary hipothesis which comprises and analyses a network of multiple relations between conception and perception through the functional, poetic, creative, cultural, and bodily capacities of architecture is as follows: „The assemblage of concept and percept in architecture is outlined upon the following features: otherness, poetics of intensity, autotelicity, (trans)culturality, and embodiment“. The primary aim of the dissertation is to inspect the conditions under which the concept-percept assemblage is formed via theoretical studies, case studies, analyses of each typical feature, and their interrelations and interweavement. A detailed analysis of these conditions from different points of view with specific instances of architectural concepts detected the universally applicable settings of the assemblage approach. The application of different research methods, such as analysis of primary and secondary sources, case study, comparative method, and logical argumentation, shape the dissertation structure which provided a theoretically and practically applicable platform. It is precisely the application of one such platform that reflects the relevance and contribution of the dissertation. Furthermore, the platform may be useful as a theoretical background for a critical observation of architecture, or it may find a practical application in architectural design. Hence, once applied to concept-percept relation in architecture, the assemblage may be a theoretical tool, methodological approach to design, or a concept-percept event itself. Finally, via one such theoretical discourse, the dissertation enables individual operationalization in architectural design and helps the assemblage thinking outgrow theoretical frameworks and become their own production in everyday life.