The aim of the research is to determine the ratio between the embodied and operational energy during the life cycle of family house which was subject to energy performance improvement measures. The life cycle energy estimate model for houses was created and applied to a typical family house in Sombor, Serbia. The model includes five partial models with mathematical equations and input-output inventories. The data for the initial, recurring and demolition energy estimates were obtained from the Ecoinvent database. The prior and post improvement operational energy was estimated by using the Passive House Planning Package - PHPP computer programme and the concepts initial and recurring operational energy were introduced. By combining the iterations of passive (improvement of thermal envelope) and active (application of technical installations) energy-saving measures a number of energy performance improvement levels of the reference family house were defined. Three characteristic improvement levels were selected through a comparative analysis of the recurring operational energy results of the reference house. The selection was made in accordance with energy efficiency requirements stipulated by the national regulations (minimal requirements for the existing houses), the non-mandatory standard - passive house (ger. Passivhaus) and the EU Regulation (nearly zero energy building - NZEB). The model for life cycle energy estimate was applied to twelve variants of the reference family house with the existing and improved energy performance. The predicted lifecycle of the house is 100 years and the improvement is conducted in the periods of 30, 40 and 50 years after the construction. The results of the research include the model for the life cycle energy estimate for houses which were subject to energy performance improvement measures and the ratio between the embodied and operational energy of typical house in Sombor. Furthermore, embodied energy necessary to meet the chosen energy efficiency V requirements and the resulting savings in operational energy of all analysed variants of the reference family house demonstrate that future improvements of existing buildings in Serbia should start from the aspect of life cycle energy expressed in primary energy units. Research points to the need for the standardisation of its measurement and the inclusion of embodied energy as an indicator for energy efficiency in the regulations.