At the beginning of the 21st century the global networks which enable the flow of economies, people and information use contemporary cities as the nodes for their concentration, redistribution and exchange. In order to gain competitiveness on the global scale, cities are in the process of revaluing their economic, social, cultural and spatial resources for new development. The quality of urban space contributes a great ’ deal to cities market value as a means of enhancing their attractiveness, primarily for business development, and working and living conditions. Since modern branding strategies rely ever more on image marketing, the creation of a high quality urban environment becomes an important part of a city’s global profile. The neo-liberal approach alters urban development strategies, aiming to restructure all urban systems and mechanisms of urban planning, management and design. The main contemporary city development models are based on: integrating knowledge in the city management (smart city); a creative approach to local governance in social, economic, and cultural practices and in city planning (creative city); and sustainable social, economic and spatial development, resilient in response to the political, social, and natural challenges posed by climate and other environmental changes (sustainable and resilient city). The development of European cities at the beginning of the 21st century is strongly related to their physical context. Therefore, the European Union (EU) has created whole range of strategies, agendas and policies to strengthen the capacities of their cities in the growing urban market. Central to the spatial transformations of European cities is the treatment of heritage areas. Beside real estate market price, added value of historic buildings is to be found in a sophisticated value-need perception, which helps characterise them as an authentic and unique local social and economic asset. Whether officially protected or not, shaped by a post-modern sensibility which appreciates the security of the past, heritage areas are being recognized as valuable cultural capital. At the same time, a sense of economic capital is based on the significant growth of creative and cultural based economies and tourism in the new urban economy. Growing economic potential and the social significance of heritage areas help encourage their protection and (creative) reuse. The size of cities, in both national and European urban networks, influences the dimensions, character and pace of their transformations. On the fall of the Iron Curtain medium sized cities of the former communist countries of Eastern Europe found themselves burdened with obsolete production capacities and decaying urban infrastructures. Spatial capacities, especially in the historic zones, were often the most valuable potential resource for the reinvention of declining cities. The beginning of the transitional period at the end of the 20th century was marked by an uncritical application of western neo-liberal development models, which put local communities under pressure from free market, deregulated urban planning procedures, management of public assets and inappropriate design solutions. The world economic crisis of 2008 prompted alternative models of economic, cultural and social practice, much more sensitive to the promotion of the creative and cultural potential of local communities. European Capital of Culture (ECoC) project as one of the most valued EU brands, brings considerable motivation in building up capacities for locally based urban change. From the beginning of 21st century, candidate selection was promoting medium sized regional centres up to 500.000 inhabitants. The European Capital of Culture (ECoC) project, one of the most successful EU initiatives, has been highly effective in motivating to build up local capacity for urban change. From the beginning of this century candidate selection has targeted medium sized regional centres of up to 500,000 inhabitants. In the preparation process, these cities focused on an individual project concentrating on: the traditional city core; historic neighbourhoods around the city centre; brownfield sites (abandoned industrial zones, redundant warehouses, former military compounds and the like); areas containing iconic architecture (in well positioned locations on the outskirts of heritage areas etc); and public areas and parkland. Besides refurbishing mostly derelict heritage areas, the construction of new, culturally iconic, architecture was effective in raising cities’ contemporary visual identity. Medium sized cities, the regional industrial, educational and cultural centres of Central Europe, have a rich heritage and recognizable historic, architectural and urban matrix features. On the southern outskirts of the region, on both sides of the former ‘iron curtain’, the cities of Graz (Austria), Pecs (Hungary) and Maribor (Slovenia) were ECoCs at the beginning of the 21st century, enjoying varying degrees of success. However, all cases have resulted in: high quality spatial transformations of heritage areas, the initiation of modern urban economies production, the adoption of new local cultural practices and a new approach to urban planning, management and design processes. The city of Novi Sad, on the south east border of Central Europe, saw in the bidding process for European Capital of Culture in 2021 an opportunity for regional repositioning after long period of decline in specific transition of the Republic of Serbia. The characteristic of Novi Sad, as the second regional political, industrial and cultural centre in the Republic of Serbia, pointed to the need to find new expressions for the city’s social, economic and cultural potential, which could be realised through the renewal and transformation of the city’s heritage areas. Their present condition, shaped solely by neo-liberal development patterns, is evidence of the malfunctions of political and economic transition, including: inefficient official protection, the absence of effective planning and management tools and the lack of commitment at various local levels. However, in the candidacy preparation process, the need for local initiatives for the development of the creative economy, new cultural and artistic practices, citizens’ initiatives, and the promotion of tourism have been recognized and acknowledged. A proposed strategy of possible spatial development projects in Novi Sad’s heritage areas for ECoC 2021, would build on the methodology already applied in other Central European Capitals of Culture. In Novi Sad’s case, new projects would be initiated in the following heritage areas: the city centre (the traditional city core and the Petrovaradin castle); the historic neighbourhoods around the city centre (five specific zones in Novi Sad and Petrovaradin); brownfield locations (the former “Petar Drapšinž factory-Chinese Quarter and the old railway sheds area); iconic architecture promotion areas (three single projects and three local cultural centres in different heritage areas); and public and green spaces within these areas. After the application of all typological elements in the Novi Sad study case, relevant directives to new approaches to strategic planning, economic development, urban planning, management frame and a list of relevant actors are proposed. The spatial transformations within Novi Sad’s heritage areas, beside achieving physical renewal, will create a new city development platform, using existing initiatives in creative and cultural practices. If supported by the local authorities, new urban planning, management and design directives will establish new practices in the spatial development of Novi Sad, which will strengthen its potential to be a successful candidate for the ECoC.