The thesis is engaged in researching art installations as 'spatial practices' that are conceived and implemented between the artistic and architectural project. In a narrow sense, the research aims to alternative spatial ideas concerning a new set of relations between the subject and a spatial order, as well as new ways of appropriation of space. Through theoretical discourse based in the methodology of architectural design and the theory of contemporary art, thesis item is routed to analyze reference examples that indicate the ways in which certain spatial situations are explored through installations designed by artists and architects. Positioning art installations as 'spatial practices' between the fields of research of art and research of architecture required a critical view of reference texts that refer to the concept of 'betweenness' and gave an interdisciplinary character to this research. The initial hypothesis in this thesis is that art installation opens up a new field of architectural research in conceiving and implementing the project so that art installations can be placed in the field of architectural theory and practice as an independent form of creativity that challenges and changes the established relationship of conception and realization of architectural project. A main stay of the hypothesis is based on interpretations of contemporary theories of architecture and art, according to which the use of the principles used in the design and realization of the artistic installation, the architects can dynamize the designing process of adopting a less determining framework and liberating architecture, defining its own media (Rendell 2006; Grosz, 2001; Hill, 1998; Bonnemaison & Eisenbach, 2009). Therefore, by assuming the characteristics of art installations within research in architectural design, the established order of architectural design with the goal of creating an independent professional positions is problematised. Given that this research was conducted on the 'diagonal axis' between art and architecture, the contribution of this thesis is twofold. The first set of results summarizes, through isolated case studies, key concepts of art installations within the field of art research. The second group results indicate the potential and importance of the concepts of art installations in architectural design, and summarizes, through case studies, the concepts of art installations as architectural categories. The study emphasizes the importance of the role of art installations in architectural design and sets new research questions that lead to the upgrading of knowledge in the field of the design process. Also, the study of art installations from the standpoint of architectural design emphasizes the importance of interdisciplinarity in the design and research and the importance of integrating the principles of art in the field of architectural design with the aim of creating innovative approach to the issue of design.