The proposed thesis studies a typological determination of the architectural production in respect of which the research considers the possibility of establishing new models and techniques of architectural design involving typological analysis, not as a fixed rule of imposed classification, but as transformable component of the design process itself. The study initially forms a critical review of knowledge about architectural typologies and the role of the type in the context of architectural design. Secondly, the thesis explores relevant philosophical concepts which can be insturmentalized into architectural discourse with the aim of creating conditions for the development of new methodological approaches to architectural design. Finally, the hypothesis is verified through the research by design method, which represents an iterative link between analytical and intuitive action in architectural process. Historically, the generic architecture occurs within a social context of mass production (Ford's Model), and is encouraged by the need for mass production of architecture. On the other hand, contemporaneity is characterized by activities that can be practiced apart from the characteristics of physical space, therefore this study questions the role of architectural types in the reality of individual cultural production (as opposed to consumerism). vi The study raises the question of whether the physical response to fluid, elusive contemporary society is in fact, an ambivalent, generic spatial type. What kind of relationship is established between the fluidity and the particularity of modern society on one hand, and the generality of the serial space on the other? The position of this study is that such typological form (generic type), within the new context of contemporaneity, is suitable for an age in which technology suggests converting mass into individual production (through the use of 3D printers i.e.). The serial, generic architectural type, through the condition of typological ambivalence, precisely allows the personalization of space. The notions of typological ambivalence and generic framework of architectural design, as well as their relationships and mutual conditionality, will be conceptualized throughout this research.