The Belgrade Fortress is complex and stratified spatial heritage unit with more or less preserved material remains dating from all the historical periods, testifying to ita centuries long development. Growing on the ruins of an old Roman military camp, then a Byzantine castle and a mediaeval fortified town, all the way to a modern fortified bastion – the Fortress was being adapted to the particular needs of each period, but it was also a proof of an important geostrategic position. Besides the geostrategic position, the numerous Fortress transformations were also influenced by historical, social and political circumstances. Historical circumstances were changing, as well as the rulers, but the Fortress retained its significance and defending purpose – whether an urban structure was growing inside or the military fortification systems. The liberation from the Turkish rule in 1867 was a starting point for the transformation process from the fortress to a city public space, occurring in two different periods: a partial rearrangement of the Fortress areas which the army was gradually abandoning, ceding them to the city, and a period of formal and systematic protection and revitalisation. This area – being a historical city core, a nucleus of the urban Belgrade development – despite the systematic protection and revitalisation works, today is not put to use in accordance with its significance and possibilities. The Fortress area is not integral to the city space – either in its purpose or functional connection, which by its importance, position and values should be. In order to find the reasons for such a situation, historical structures valorisation was conducted and the valorisation of all the changes occurring in the recent history when the process of transformation from the fortress to the city space was taking place. Also, analyses were conducted of how far ideas, concepts and plans were realised in the period when the Fortress was being transformed to a public space, as well as the conservation principles and methods implemented in the period of formal architectural heritage protection activities. Redefining the significance and revalorisation of the IV Belgrade Fortress constituted a prerequisite for establishing a conservation approach which would enable a better integration of the Fortress and city areas. To that end, a special focus has been put on an analysis of the potentials and limitation factors, from the aspect of the already existing connections but also of the obstructing roads along the Fortress – city direction. By testing a new conservation approach to and the treatment of the Fortress, as part of the overall architectural heritage stock in the city central zone, against the modern theoretical grounds established in the international charters and recommendations, a new methodological process has been defined, which could be implemented in both the architectural heritage protection practice and legislation.