This work deals with optimality of the existing form-finding methods for generation of initial geometry of tensile structures. It compares the geometry results and the efficiency of these methods, as well as the software packages based on these methods. Tensile structures are the most appropriate way for covering large scale areas and buildings, with no thermal insulation requirements. The minimal usage of constructing materials of tensile structures is an inevitable argument in their favor. In the region of Balkans, these structures are still very rare. Often, the architects and the engineers use habitually stiff structures for spanning large areas, even if all the indicators are in favor of tensile structures (membranes or cable nets). Regarding the fact, that the geometry of tensile structures obeys strict mathematical rules, this work analyses the methods for generating the preliminary geometry of a tensile structure – also called form-finding, from the aspect of the efficiency of the methods and their results. In the very beginning, form-finding is an iterative, intuitive and experimental process, the architect obtains the structural geometry by making soap-film, stocking or elastic tulle models. With further development of tensile structures, this process became more and more digitalized. It was necessary to develop algorithms, that would make it possible to approximately calculate (by the computer) the position of the structural nodes, so the structure itself is in static equilibrium. From this pragmatic need, many form-finding methods were developed: Force-density method (by Linkwitz and Schek 1974), Dynamic relaxation (Barnes 1977), later on Updated Reference Strategy (Bletzinger 2001) and others. This work will compare these methods and the software packages they are implemented in. To find the initial equilibrium geometry of typical structure examples several form- finding methods have been used: the linearized Force-density method (FDM), Dynamic relaxation (DR), Updated reference strategy (URS) and the finite-differences method for calculating minimal surfaces over the same boundary conditions (programmed in Mathematica by the author). The stated form-finding methods have been analysed in the first part of the dissertation, as well as the comparisons that have been published in the scientific literature. The second part of the dissertation deals with the comparison of results of the reviewed methods applied to typical structural examples (e.g. the saddle, conical membrane, etc.) The last part analyses the software packages that use the reviewed methods (e.g. EASY®, GS Suite®, Rhinomembrane) from several aspects. The structural theory with the explanation of the geometrical stiffness matrix has been explained in the Appendix I. The experimental modelling process has been presented in the Appendix II. The programming code (programmed in Mathematica®) for calculating a minimal surface with identical boundary conditions has been presented in the Appendix III. The aim of the research is to determine the optimal form-finding method, respecting the previous research in this field, as well as the optimal form-finding software. The optimality of the software package, as well as the supporting method is depending on the user and the specific project and the economical validity, those aspects will be included in the conclusions of this research. Methodologically, this work has two dimensions. The first dimension is an analytical comparison of the results of the presented form-finding methods. The second dimension are empirical, experience based acknowledgements, that the author collected during long term use of software for membrane structural design and form- finding, throughout her studies at the University in Stuttgart and several Workshops at the University of Berlin, as well as during the master course at the Faculty of Civil Engineering, University of Belgrade and in collaboration with the company TENDAMONT from Belgrade and Florian Weinmann Modelle from Stuttgart. Programming software for form-finding of tensile structures is a very complicated, voluminous and responsible work, which demands a team made of experts in several disciplines. That is the reason why the author used existing, commercial software for gathering the results of her research that was kindly made available to the author by the companies and their associates. For generating the preliminary geometry of typical examples with FDM the software package EASY has been used, made available to the author by the courtesy of TECHNET GmbH from Germany. For generating the results by dynamic relaxation (DR), the software- package GS Suite, made available to the author by the company OASYS from Great Britain. For generating the geometry with Updated Reference Strategy (URS) the software package Rhinoceros and the plug-in for formfinding Rhinomembrane have been used, that was made available to the author by the courtesy of Florian Weinmann Modelle. Finally, for the minimal surface solution, the author’s program in Mathematica® in collaboration with the Faculty of Mathematics, University of Belgrade has been used. Within this dissertation, four typical examples were analysed: an asymmetrical hyperboloid (4-point sail), the minimal surface of Concus (with a sinusoidal arch as boundary condition, a saddle-shaped surface and a conical tent with a singular boundary condition (BC). The simulation of the minimal surface with the same BC that was obtained by the finite differences method programmed by the author and the results gained by the commercial software using FDM and URS was max. 1.50% of the structure elevation, but the difference of the overall geometry (for example the deformation of the boundary conditions during formfinding) is not negligible and has been presented graphically within the dissertation. A further example from the author´s master thesis was analyzed using Dynamic relaxation within the software package GSASuite and the results were compared to the results obtained by the FDM using the software package EASY. The curvature of the surface obtained by FDM was greater than the DR generated surface. The elevation difference (with the same fixed points) of the structure was 1.6%. In a preliminary, form-finding stage, these geometry differences may not be significant, but it could be of significance under external loads and their combinations (heavy wind or snow load conditions). For the comparison of commercial software packages, except of the mentioned packages, the program Membrane that was made available to the author by the company TENDAMONT from Belgrade, have been used. Also, Ken Brakke’s Surface Evolver have been mentioned, a minimal surface generating software that is available on the internet.