The topic of the doctoral thesis is the research on the complex relationship
between public open spaces in inherited collective housing neighborhood blocks
built in the second half of the 20 century and everyday social life, as well as the
forms of social interaction as patterns of use of urban public spaces in collective
housing neighborhoods. The issues in urban neighborhood spaces are manifested
both at social and spatial level through the alienation of the population, the lack of
joint activities and stay in the neighborhood public open, a low level of vitality, a
lack of adequate maintenance and reduced safety.
In a continuous two-way process people create and modify space while at
the same time, space affects and changes people. Even as the physical space
represents the result of social processes and changes, so is the human behavior
determined by physical, but also social and cultural context. The assumption is that
spatial transformation of collective neighborhoods could be approached from the
standpoint of transformation of socio spatial relationships underlying the patterns
of use of neighborhood public open spaces. Given that the prerequisite for social
events is the presence of actors-users of space, the interplay between the physical
characteristics of urban structure and architecture that forms public open spaces
and the users` activities that are being carried out through the symbolic content
arising from the context of occasional and every day activities, recurring in time,
related to the paths traced in space and actors abilities.
The research work was carried out by combining several scientific methods
and techniques applicable in the field of urban planning, architecture and social
sciences. The analysis of the neighborhood spatial form determinants is
represented by the universally applicable typology based on spatial and
sociological theories about the relationship of urban space and social processes,
applicable to areas that generate patterns of people encounters and
gatherings. Understanding the relation between human behaviors through the
capacity of neighborhood open space contributes to the quality of the open spaces
design and especially to enhancing the vitality of the city public spaces. The
purpose is to obtain scientifically based approach to the public space design in a
view of its use that may be beneficial to urban planners in the process of urban
regeneration and redesign.
The paper contains a case study of the residential area of Novi Grad as a
part of the inner city of Podgorica. The research on public open spaces of Novi
Grad in Podgorica represents an analysis of the specific spatial social
neighborhood model in relation to universal urban architectural paradigms, taking
into account the social context of the period when the urban unit of Novi Grad was
planned and built, within which the correlation between urban form and every day
activities of neighborhood public life was analyzed.
The research results contribute to the urban space regeneration approach from the
perspective of users and patterns of use of space in relation to the spatial
configuration. 