The villages of Šar Mountain are characterised by abundant cultural-historical monuments from different periods of human civilisation. The heritage that is widely spread over the most attractive natural landscapes also is noticeable in the form of the complexes of old town or village architecture with monumental character. Prizren is a real treasury of cultural heritage; it is the "town-museum", and the pearl of traditional architecture. In many aspects, Tetovo, from the other side of Šar Mountain, joins Prizren. While oriental influence is noticeable in the architecture of urban tissue, the villages on Šar mountain, on the other hand, contain preserved authentic architecture of Serbian population that it inhabiting this area since olden times. Šar mountain is hence genuine architectural and ethnological park that witnesses on historical development and life continuum. In this architectural-ethnological park, original architectural forms may be found. Due to large distances and high mountain space, the forms, made of locally available materials and with high skills of the masons of Sredačka župa, are shaped according to climatic and social conditions, in all cases with the right measure and recognizable character. From these reasons, old houses' complexes, together with natural landscape in which they are set, seem unreal and resemble of "small town" with embodied skills of artisans who firstly built houses in their own villages, and then Arbanas towers, from Prizren, over Romania, all until the United States. Traditional construction in the villages of Šar Mountain reached its culmination at the turn of the 19th to 20th century. This is especially visible on residential buildings with remarkable structure and autochthonic architectural form. On the other hand, the socio- cultural phenomenon of the artisans' emergence has also influenced the appearance of this unique architecture. In this regard, it may be concluded that the architecture of Šar Mountain villages represent the result of autochthonic environmental characteristics as well as of the movement and skills of its excellent masons. It is believed that the work focusing on this part of architectural heritage will get the attention from our scientific and professional public, contribute to better overview of the research area and find its application in further architectural studies.