The reduction in the quality of newly built apartment units within the Serbian housing market has been evident ever since the dissolution of Yugoslavia in the 1990s. As a result of the changes in the socio-economic system of Serbia, companies and organizations that once invested in housing in order to provide their own employees with appropriate housing solutions were no longer able to continue with the aforementioned construction practice. Moreover, the collapse of the system of organized investing, construction supervision and apartment allocation led to a predicament in which families without housing were forced to secure it on their own. The construction industry entered a crisis. Large construction companies with considerable construction experience were growing weaker, while smaller companies, which were often acting in the capacities of both builders and investors seeking a quick profit, started appearing on the newly established construction market. The lack of organized housing construction monitoring and control, from the planning to the construction phase, resulted in the decline in apartment quality. At the present moment, the buyers face a difficult task when weighing positive and negative aspects of an apartment with an aim to properly assess the overall quality of the unit they intend to purchase. They often make wrong decisions along the way, because an average buyer can only assess the quality of an apartment after using it and living in it for a while. Wrong apartment selection also means reduced comfort and heathy indoor environment, which could have a negative impact on the occupants’ wellbeing. The increase in apartment quality in Serbia is of utmost importance. III Seeking examples of advanced housing construction practice that could be applied in Serbia would also be of great help when trying to obtain insight into inadequate apartment characteristics and possibilities for quality improvement. One of the examples of good quality practice is the contemporary Dutch housing. By taking into account their own tradition in relation to housing and by utilizing positive experiences of other exemplary housing practices from around the world, the Dutch housing industry achieved an enviable level of quality in the last several decades that we all should aspire to. The comparative analyses of construction standards and the selected better quality apartment unit models in both Serbia and the Netherlands led to conclusions on their qualitative differences. The end result of these analyses is a set of defined measures and activities aimed at the overall general apartment quality improvement within the Serbian housing market. As an additional impetus to the apartment quality improvement within our housing market, a methodology for assessing overall general apartment quality has been devised alongside the present research study, in order to help a potential buyer get better acquainted with the quality of the apartment he/she aims to purchase. Furthermore, the end result of the applied assessment methodology would be an overall apartment quality certificate, which represents a mandatory document issued by an independent appraiser that would come with every apartment being sold on the market. Overall apartment quality certificate would provide each and every buyer with easily understandable key information on the general apartment quality and would guide the buyers towards buying a better quality apartment unit. Greater demand for better quality apartment units will inevitably force bigger investors and builders to focus on constructing apartments of higher overall quality. In the aforementioned manner, the citizens would be provided with apartments featuring adequate comfort levels and healthy indoor environment, IV while, at the same time, this would result in the improvement of the dwelling fund of our country.