In the present dissertation analyses of the ground motion and air-blast overpressure induced by blasting, as well as their effects on neighbouring buildings (houses, households), in limestone quarries is given. Limestone is chosen as a representative rock unit for investigating the ground vibration because it is the most common rock type in Serbian quarries, and limestone is mostly used rock type for civil engineering purposes. Moreover, there have been many experimental investigations carried out on blast-induced vibrations in limestone. Peak particle velocity near neighbouring structures was measured during ordinary blasting operations in limestone quarries. The effects of blast-induced ground motion were evaluated by conventional predictors, in accordance with legal regulations and engineering practice. Their predictive power was estimated in relation to peak particle velocity. A new artificial neural network model for the prediction of blast impact on building was introduced with three input units (total charge, maximum charge per delay and distance from explosive charge to monitoring point), with one hidden layer and one output unit (peak particle velocity). Effects on existing architectural buildings were estimated by comparing peak particle velocities with values defined by existing vibration standards. In order to more precisely evaluate real effects blast-induced ground motion on neighbouring buildings, a numerical stress – strain analysis of structural elements was carried out. This procedure is a non-standard method in analysis of the impact of blasting on surrounding objects. Surrounding buildings were modelled with finite element method using academic and commercial software packages. Measured time recordings were used for the direct dynamics analysis. The obtained results indicate which elements are the most loaded and on which points damages can be expected to occur first. The results of calculations show that blasting performed in accordance with positive vibration standards cause far less stresses and strains than allowed thus avoiding damages on buildings. In order to determine the effects of blast-induced ground motion on type architectural objects, an analysis was performed on several characteristic types of brick and reinforced concrete buildings using measured time recordings. The results show that stresses and strains of the analysed types of objects are lesser than allowed for impacts registered on the measuring points. Distances and explosive quantities, that do not exceed allowed stresses of the analysed object, were calculated using conventional predictors and the given procedure. In that way, by applying this non-standard method, it is possible to determine safe distances from blasting points for chosen authoritative criteria, and for different types of architectural buildings.