Disintegration of the Yugoslav idea and the collapse of the socialist social system at the end of the 20th century have initiated the need for analysis of previous experiences in the field of social relations and architectural heritage in the territory of ex-Yugoslavia. In that sense, the existence of historical and political distance enables a more objective and comprehensive interpretation of the ideological framework of the said period’s architecture. A critical analysis of the social, political and cultural events in Serbia, presented in this paper, depicts the specific characteristics that have influenced the development of new practice and content in architecture and urbanism in the villages from 1946 to 1970. This time period is selected due to fact that it is defined by the adoption of important acts determining the direction of social and cultural development in Yugoslavia, primarily five-year plans. Along with providing the contribution to the study of Yugoslav architectural heritage, this research paper also defines a different methodological approach to the analysis of rural architecture heritage. By synthesizing several scientific methods, primary one being the analysis of the scientific and professional literature, this PhD thesis reviews the relationship between architecture and politics, and generates the possibility of establishment of new research questions pertaining to the development of rural settlements in Serbia. The assumption that the planning and construction of public purpose buildings in villages had played an important role in the cultural and political education of rural population has influenced the focus of this research paper. The buildings covered by the paper belong to the group of educational and commercial facilities of general importance. Their architecture and style characteristics exceeded the framework of the VII existing traditional and cultural-historical values of architectural heritage, which made them unique in the sense of socialist practice heritage in rural areas. In the goal of relevant interpretation of the relationship between architecture and ideological-political claims, the paper primarily focuses on theoretical considerations in the field of architecture and ideology, establishing the foundation for further research in the form of a case study contributing to the validation of the stated hypotheses. Having in mind the lack of theoretical studies in the field of rural architecture, and the fact that socialist architecture practice in Serbian villages was never in focus of comprehensive multidisciplinary research, this paper aims to demonstrate the specific characteristics of planning and development in the given period, as well as the impact of such approach on the future development and organization of rural settlements in Serbia. The initial research phase presents an analysis of the theoretical approach providing a general overview of the development of specialist architecture, with a special emphasis on the Soviet and Yugoslav practice. The selection of theoretical framework based on the relationship between architecture and ideology is justified by the fact that Yugoslav architecture was a part of the general cultural development of Yugoslav society. It was considered a means for embodiment of socialist ideas, which is precisely why it is important to review its development through the lens of shifts in political relations. In line with all of the above, it should be mentioned that the theoretical discourse is firmly grounded in the heritage and contemporary interpretations of socialist ideology, as well as in theoretical principles of Marxist philosophers. The importance of study of Soviet architecture is relevant for the correct interpretation of Yugoslav practice ideological framework. Cultural, economic and political relationship between the Yugoslav political establishment of the time and the Soviet union have influenced Yugoslav architecture and art, making them follow the Soviet development trends until 1950. In that sense, the review of a wider context of development of socialist realism, as well as its official doctrine and trends, lies in the focus of a separate section of this research paper. The direct influence of the Communist Party on the professional organizations of engineers and technicians in Yugoslavia has caused a need for the analysis of the work VIII of these associations, with the aim of discovering the specific traits of the design methodology of the time. This paper primarily highlights the considerable importance of the Association of Engineers and Technicians of Yugoslavia, in the goal of objective and critical review of the causal relationship between the socialist ideology and architectural and urbanistic practice in rural regions. An overview of practice in the field of architecture and urbanism in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, with a special emphasis on rural heritage, represents an integral part of this research paper. Comparative analysis of the pre-war and post-war periods relates to the depiction of similarities in the approach and design within the framework of different social value systems. Ideological, socialism-based motivation notwithstanding, the construction of typical various-purpose buildings in rural settlements represented a common characteristic for both Yugoslavias. The summary of results in concluding remarks indicates the dual character of post-war rural construction. The buildings received a status of socialist culture symbols along with their utilitarian role. The case studies focusing on standard facilities, such as cooperative buildings, village elementary schools, food industry facilities, and rural agricultural facilities, indicate a shift in traditional framework and introduction of a different approach to design. The specific traits of this new approach were reflected primarily in the involvement of various professional organizations in the process of design, organization of mass work actions during construction, and the dissemination of agitprop culture.