Rapid and complex changes in all spheres of today's society define a fluid context in which contemporary architecture is formed and they assign it attributes of multidisciplinary practice with a constant idea of change. Adaptation to these changes results not only in dynamic redefinition of architect's role, but in redefinition of the design paradigm itself as well, by reassessing it and establishing new design principles. The objective is to position a certain transformation principle within the architectural discourse through the process of systematization and classification in order to indicate its evolving course, influence and its importance in the progression of both society and architectural theory and practice from various Avant-garde movements during the 20th century, to the digital paradigm development. By further examining of the transformation principles in architectural discourse, the aspects of applying these principles are defined in purpose of adapting buildings to dynamical alterations of the context and needs of users. With regards to this issue, by perceiving transformation with all its complexities, the following principles can be defined in several categories: mobility, ephemerality, modularity, prefabrication, perceptive transformation, universality, open plan, interaction and improvisation. Examining ubiety, character and relations among defined principles through the analyses of several architecturally relevant examples, this PhD thesis investigates influence and implementation of the transformation principles in the evolvement of design models. The research platform is referenced to Pritzker prize laureates since the year 2000, with particular attention drawn to those laureates who implement the transformation principles in their theoretical work as well. The affirmation level of transformation principles in the analyzed projects demonstrates their emerging relevance as the life standards are changing, therefore it becomes integrated with the methodological apparatus in the VII process of contemporary architectural design. The performed analysis of the examples indicates that contemporary approach in the architectural design requires elasticity of a design model whose integrated part is a transformation principle. It is particularly implied that compatibility of certain principles, which serves as a conceptual framework for defining specific design models, emerges from the influence of transformation principles. Definition of contemporary design models in the terms of transformation principles does not represent entirely predetermined approach in architectural design. Through this research, the accent is placed on the contribution in the platform establishment which is supposed to encourage further research and expand the field of possibilities for creative activity in architectural design. In that sense, classification of contemporary design models represents elastic approach which assists in character clarification of dynamic architectural concepts.