The dissertation topic encompasses the fields of architecture and lighting within open public spaces. The motivation for the research is insufficiently explored phenomenon of the open public space boundary and its significance for the complex urban relations of the city. Open public spaces as generators of the city's public life represent the place in which social contacts are made, but also the users' place of leisure which therefore requires a pleasant ambiance. The purpose of lighting in a public space in fact becomes apparent by achieving pleasant atmosphere and desirable ambiance. Because the topic is current there is a need for continuous improvement of the urban ambiances and stressing out the architectural values of the open public spaces, which play an important part in the identity creation of the city. The significance of the boundary for the space which it confines is visible through the influence of its structure on the creation of ambiance in space. It is the aim of this research to introduce a clear definition of the phenomenon of the open public space boundary, and to create appropriate typology regarding the complex urban context of the city. Through the research process it has become apparent that the boundary of an open public urban space can appear in many different forms of representation, because the understanding of these boundaries is affected by the impression of the beholder. Regardless of whether the boundary consists of material attributes, or simply represents a set of determined norms which are perceived and comprehended as barrier in the beholders' experience, it is appreciated as the spatial phenomenon. Based on the results of this segment of analysis criteria were established for typological classification of the open public space urban boundaries. In regard of the aspects of these boundaries, three criteria stood out, by which a typological classification is possible - flexibility, distinctiveness, and permeability of the boundary. From this set of criteria twelve types of the open public urban space were introduced. This typology contributes to understanding of the dependent relation between the boundaries' built space and the open public space, and of the ancillary activities carried iv out in the open public space and within its limits. The research outputs led to the conclusion that the type of the open public space does not predetermine the type of the boundary. As the point of encounter for two domains of a different rank, boundary depicts the aspects of the spaces it connects. Because of the dual nature of the boundary, its flexibility in creation of the desired perception of the ambiance of the open public space in the complex urban context has been underlined. The paramount aim of the research is to emphasize the importance of the open public space boundary in the lighting design process, by acknowledging the effects of the lighting quality parametres to the appearance and perception of the different boundary types. Further goal would be to outline the interdependent influence of the lighting within the open public space and the lighting of its boundaries, and on the other hand to define their respective relations depending on the type of the boundary. Lighting of the open public spaces is an important feature which creates ambiances. The way a public space would appear in night time is a basic measure to achieve an active urban space, and therefore the importance of lighting is reflected in the possibility of gaining the desired effects in space to obtain a pleasant atmosphere. However, there is a problem of insufficiently defined set of existing guidelines for lighting design in the open public spaces of the city. The current provisions are oriented towards fulfillment of the functional aspect - to enable the course of traffic and to provide safety for the users. Different kinds of open public spaces, as well as their boundaries, are all treated in the uniform way, which results in complete negligence of the complexity of the urban context. The research was carried out by analyzing lighting settings on the specific sample of different types of open public spaces, in relation to the types of boundaries which form them. For each predefined type of boundary of the open public space a representative specimen was selected on which experimental study (both in field and in laboratory), as well as photometrical calculation were perfomed. The analysis of the interrelations between the space and the boundary led to the establishment of the influence of the boundary types on lighting in open public urban spaces. The results of the research allow for development of a set of parametres of the lighting quality which influence the achievement of desired boundary perception by beholders. Following the results, the v interrelated influence of the public open space boundary attributes and the lighting quality parametres was presented. The research outcomes would contribute to the fundamental theory in the field of architecture through definition of the open public space boundary phenomenon, as well as presentation of the lighting influence on the perception of this boundary. In practice, this research would help understand the influence of the lighting quality parametres on the appearance of the boundary structure in order to accomplish desired ambiances within open public spaces of the city. Aiming to improve the lighting design process, the research gave way to creation of a set of guidelines regarding lighting of the open public spaces in relation to the features of its boundaries.