The core of the doctoral dissertation presents a research of the methodology improvement possibilities for the spatial development planning of public services in Serbia. The need to improve the theoretical basis of public services planning, as well as the contribution to establishing their better planning practice stemmed from previous research and insight into the problems in the field of public services and determined the motives for the selection of topic. The dynamic development in the modern world, especially in countries in transition such as Serbia imposes changes in the development of the sector of public services and its spatial development planning, as well as exploring new or adjusting existing working patterns. Although it is well known that there are widely accepted and recognized principles based on theoretical research and international documents, universal patterns that are adapted to practice do not exist. Therefore, the review and redefinition of contextually specific methodological tools remains a challenging research task. Over long period, planning of public services in Serbia is characterized by inadequate, contradictory and uncompleted development framework, which has found itself in the gap between the abandoned normative model of planning public services in the context of the planned economy on one hand, and the neo-liberal, market-oriented model of the economy, the privatization and deregulation processes and the disintegration of the public services system, on the other hand. Other than urban/spatial plan as a product, an integrating framework of planning and development of public services never existed, nor it exists now. The problems are particularly visible at the local, primary level of public services, which is characterized by size, density and dispersion in the territory, but also by uneven spatial distribution. Partially centralized system in the field of planning and financing of public services at the national level, is collapsing. The cause of this situation lies in the inadequate policies and undefined goals and criteria for spatial development. In addition, there is a problem of spatial insensitivity in this domain, as well as poor inclusion of spatial and physical aspects of planning and other important influencing factors. (Mitrović, 2006.). Having in mind the overall condition of the existing planning and development of public services in Serbia, in this situation it is difficult to identify a long-term policy of their physical development, so the changes of the existing planning model are necessary. They should include a viable, flexible approach to planning that ensures adaptation to local and regional characteristics of the planned area. The main subject of the research is the change in the pattern and method of public services planning, with regard to the context which consists of the concept of social sustainability, framework of civil rights, equality, justice and social cohesion, and on the other hand - the practice of public services planning in the world and in Serbia. Public services represent a common ground for all of these areas, creating an arena in which they overlap, exclude each other or are complementary. Newer trends in urban planning, such as sustainable planning, but also market conditions that affect the development of cities and territories in Serbia today necessarily direct research to the locally specific results. Previous studies have indicated little or no possibility of transferring European and other experiences in the field of sustainable planning implementation, bearing in mind the economic, social, political, and consequently, spatial legacy of Serbian cities. At the same time, there are very few research results relating to the linking of social equality and justice, and the concept of social cohesion with the planning of public services. Therefore, the scientific contribution of the doctoral thesis is defining the possibilities of the implementation of sustainable development principles on the basis of an integrated approach with the aim of establishing a connection to the chosen set of values, with regard to the transitional conditions. In the part of the research related to the operationalization of the presented theoretical assumptions and principles of spatial development planning of public services, the work focuses on the choice of methodological tools and the definition of criteria and indicators, as well as on defining a framework of improved model of planning, harmonised with urban / regional planning practice in Serbia. The results should undoubtedly reflex the local characteristics of the planning territory, making it unique in the sense of defining the planning strategy and the concept of development. Their implementation is shown within given case studies of the specified research areas in different parts of Serbia.