This doctoral dissertation examines the process of preparing, elaborating and
implementing Belgrade’s 1923-24 General Urban Plan. The impact of design
proposals from the 1921-1922 international competition on the content and concept of
the General Plan is analyzed and a comparison is made between the General Plan’s
ideas and its achieved results, by taking a look at what hindered the Plan from being
implemented. As the capital of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, Belgrade’s urban planning
and development in the period between the two world wars are considered within the
context of social and economic circumstances in the newly-formed state.
Singling out this important period in the city’s development, key phases are
recognized and explained in the process of elaborating and implementing the General
Plan that was written in 1923 and adopted in 1924. Published material and literature
were used along with extensive unpublished material, collected in domestic and
foreign archives and related institutions, which has not been the subject of analysis and
interpretation in our environment to date. A large number of documents and original
plans are analyzed and presented for the first time in this doctoral dissertation.
Designs from the international competition to regulate and enlarge Belgrade
comprised an important foundation for the General Plan and greatly contributed to the
resolution of some of its key issues. The Belgrade competition was specific owing to
the fact that almost all of its participants were from abroad. The concept and content of
the General Plan were thus under the direct influence of modern urban planning theory
and practice found in the planning of European towns.
An examination of the General Plan’s program and attendant reports, studies and
designs that were elaborated for various issues and sectors, showed the General Plan to
be a complex document. In spite of its drawbacks, for the first time in the history of
Belgrade’s urban planning, this Plan offered a comprehensive vision of modern urban
planning and the development of city structures and systems.
An analysis of the role of various stakeholders in the process of implementing
the General Plan – ranging from state institutions and the economic elite, Belgrade
municipality and its services, to the city’s residents – indicates that many of them did
not respect the provisions of this document. The ruling elite and state institutions were
at the forefront in disrespecting the plan.
A comparative analysis of what was planned with what was completed later,
until the Second World War and postwar period, shows that the greater part of the
anticipated functions, content and facilities were not carried out in accordance with the
adopted General Plan. The considerable departure from planned ideas and schemes
had far-reaching consequences on the regulation of the city and its overall
morphology. On the other hand, what was carried out in the spirit of the General Plan
is the embodiment today of clearly formed and praiseworthy city settings and entities.
This research sheds light on some of the important question marks and
consequential assumptions about Belgrade’s urban planning in the interwar period.
Using forgotten and little-known sources from domestic and foreign institutions, this
doctoral dissertation contributes to deeper knowledge about Belgrade’s urban planning
and architectural development in the first half of the 20th century and offers the
possibility of new research in this field.