The central topic of the following dissertation are urban housing forms, i.e. spatial - physical patterns of structures present in nowadays production and distribution in Belgrade. Research compounds offer of existing urban housing forms in Belgrade, and possibilities for its extension and diversification. In order to list and analyse existing housing forms in Belgrade from this aspect, the term urban housing type was established, which presents urban-morphological type of housing as a product of planning process. The phenomenon of urban housing type is constituted through two aspects of the research: (1) spatial and morphological characteristics of housing model, and (2) planning process as public activity which articulates it through the procedure of making and adopting. Research of existing housing types in Belgrade during the period of post-socialist political, social and cultural transition and conditions for its diversification, according to the aspects of the work, is performed on two parallel tracks. The first stream line is research of the urban housing types as urban-morphological phenomenon which includes characteristics of urban housing. As set, it is defined by planning parameters which gives them specific form. Planning parameters, on the other hand, are product of operational planning practice in certain conditions, and they are coding physical structures and urban forms, in concrete context, for different groups, according to their specific spatial and other needs and preferences. The first hypothesis is formulated on the basis of the explored and presented changes in urban structure in the process of post-socialist transition, and it puts in the focus transformation of housing forms in that period. Transformation of urban housing forms is investigated, total supply of urban housing types in Belgrade is recorded and analysed, and it is hypothesized that post-socialist transition caused characteristic urban housing types. The other track of the research investigates the role and manoeuvre possibilities of planning during the process of generating transitional urban housing types, and appoints the hypothesis about limited potential of urban planning for diversification of their variety. At the end of the first track of the research, the result is inventory and typology of existing transitional housing forms, which verifies the first hypothesis about new housing types in transformed urban structure, i.e. new urban housing types. Outcome of the second research 7 track are preconditions and limitations for eventual diversification process, and it is the validation of the second hypothesis on real possibilities for wider diversity of urban housing types. The context of the research is post-socialist social, political and cultural transition, which has marked last decades in Belgrade and Serbia, and the current spectra of housing forms were created during this period. The transition, as process with specific phases and spatial effects, is the frame for this reconstruction of the urban form. The existing housing types are detected within detailed urban plans in zones of transformation, recognized as standard for transitional cities. They are analysed by the urban morphology classical methodology, as established by Conzen, with certain adapting of three basic layers of Conzen’s analyses: the town plan, pattern of building forms and pattern of land use, and finally the urban housing types are derived. In this course of the paper, the set of criteria for the investigation of housing types is assembled relaying on literature review. The role and range of planning during post-socialist transition also refers to experience and theoretical research in other post-socialist milieus. Planning policies and wider social and political framework which influences planning and implementation process: primarily market and planning institutions are investigated. The next step is to set the relations between planning policy and procedures, and recognized urban housing types. Conclusions are presented first by hypothesis, and later other finding considering urban housing forms are presented, together with their transformation during post-socialist transition, and possibilities for diversification. Particularly important are observations and results on distinctive urban housing types, specific planning instruments, and contradictions in planning procedures and inconsistencies of planning policy. The final conclusions point on possible directions of further research, as well as theoretical and practical usability of its results.