Dissertation deals with the problem of approach to spatial transformation of inherited public housing neighborhoods in function of their urban regeneration. The concept of the neighborhood unit as a method of planning and design of the housing units produced in different environments different effects on quality of life, but related problems as well. Urbanity problems are visible both in the social domain in the form of poor connection between people and people and places, and in the spatial domain in form of poor livability of public spaces. Many neighborhoods in Western Europe have already undergone or are currently undergoing a process of urban regeneration. Although the connection between the spatial characteristics of neighborhoods and the problems of urbanity is recognized, applications of regenerative measures often remain in the socio- economic domain. The basic question of this study is how to define a model of spatial transformations of the public housing neighborhood, which may contribute to the positive effects of the process of urban regeneration, especially the progress of vitality and socialization? The starting assumption of the study implies that the model of spatial transformation of the public housing neighborhoods should be designed with the knowledge of socio - spatial relation underlying the patterns of collective life of the neighborhood. Public spaces and their use are an important component of this relationship. The presence of people in the open spaces does not imply the existence of urbanity, but it is a necessary condition to establish the relationship between people and space and communication between people with each other. The organization of space and its physical characteristics influence the relationship between people, their activities and ideas. The study was conducted using a combination of several basic and specific scientific methods and techniques applicable in the field of architecture and urbanism and the field of humanities. General scientific method by which the research is structured is an analytical-synthetic method and basic scientific methods which are applied are the method of logical argumentation, the method of scientific analysis, the method of case study, and the grounded theory method. Techniques of Space Syntax were applied for the analysis of the spatial configuration of the case study neighborhood in relation to patterns of use, such as drawing the axial and convex maps of neighborhood and analysis of spatial integration. An important part of the data base in the context of the case study is formed by field reconnaissance that involves residents’ questionnaire, photographing and mapping of the spatial characteristics of neighborhood and activities in public open spaces. The results of the first part of the study show that the open public spaces can be defined as the primary subject of spatial transformation in the context of neighborhood regeneration and renewal of vitality, sociability and connection between people and space. The configuration of public space can affect the patterns of daily use which support local community identity and its integration into the global system of the city. The result of the second part of the dissertation is the analytical device for analyzing the configuration of public space which is defined in the form of a universally applicable typology. This typology is based on spatial and sociological theories about relations between space and society. The main purpose of the typology is to measure the capacity of urban structure and architecture of the neighborhoods for supporting the collective patterns of use of open public spaces. Also, to overcome the analysis of open public spaces from the perspective of fixed morphological categories and enable their observation inside dynamic relation between local and global patterns of form. Тhe spatial patterns of public space are defined, аccording to the understanding of spatial form as configuration and its relation to the practical and the imaginative dimension of use, applicable in the regulation and design of public spaces and neighborhoods and adaptable to other factors of urbanity. The results of this study are contribution to the discipline of urban regeneration. In a narrow sense, this research is a contribution to the field of conceptualizing new approaches to urban design of neighborhood public spaces. It is based on the analytic theory of configurational nature of urban space and sociological theories about interconnection of social life and social relations with the routine activities of everyday life. This approach is not in contradiction with intuitive approach to urban design, but it is its complement in certain stages of the process, which can reduce the risk of failure of spatial interventions. The study affirms the bottom-up approach in the process of regeneration and redesign of neighborhoods by focusing people and their patterns of daily use of open public space.