The energy consumption, constantly increasing due to industrial development and higher living standards, has been leading to impoverishment of both natural resources and environmental pollution, indirectly affecting the global climate change. Given the estimate that in the Republic of Srpska (Bosnia and Herzegovina) about 51.8% of the total energy is consumed in the building stock, one of the priorities and long-term goals is the research of energy optimisation of buildings, as an important aspect of overall energy efficiency. The main task of research is to determine the representative samples of the existing residential buildings in Banja Luka, which are reference buildings for the implementation of measures aimed at energy optimization of the building envelope. This research discusses climatic characteristics of Banja Luka relevant for energy optimization of the building envelope. The research provides information on appropriate materials for energy optimization of the building envelope. In addition, the research provides recommendations and methodology for energy optimization of the existing residential building envelope in the city of Banja Luka and beyond. Design and implementation of energy efficiency measures in order to optimize the envelope and provide thermal comfort, requires that architects and other professionals engaged in designing possess adequate knowledge of the measures and their potential applications. The aim is to review the parameters of energy efficiency for representative samples, specific energy consumption for heating and CO emissions, and to analyse measures 2 for refurbishment, through examining of appropriate materials available on the market of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in terms of energy and economy, and to establish reference models of refurbishment of the building envelope of representative samples. This research presents the analysis of energy savings and cost efficiency of measures applied to the energy optimization of the entire envelope of specified samples. Aiming to improve respective regulations in the Republic of Srpska, results of this research provide adequate proposals for maximum/limit of U-value [W/(m2K)] - thermal transmittance for the elements of the building envelope, for the climatic conditions of Banja Luka. The research analyses the technical and economic parameters of materials and measures for energy optimization of the building envelope and determines concrete improvements for the building envelope for representative samples of existing residential buildings within the city of Banja Luka. The methodological approaches applied and the results allow overview of the parameters that influence on the consumption of energy for heating in buildings, as well as creation of reference models for refurbishment of the building envelope of existing residential buildings.