The aim of the paper is to present an architectonic study of Roman Catholic churches built in Vojvodina in years 1699. to 1939. The revitalization of the southern Hungarian region followed the end of the domination of the Ottoman Empire in the lands of the Habsburg Monarchy (1745-1918, Austrian Empire, 1804-1867. & Austro-Hungarian Empire, 1867-1918.) in the times after the Austro-Turkish wars and the signing of the Karlovci (1699.) and Pozarevac (1718.) Peace Treats. The period of political and economic stability, which lasted until the outbreak of the First World War, was favorable time for a comprehensive expansion of constructing activities. The continuity of the construction of religious buildings of the state-dominant Roman Catholic religion, can be followed after this period, until the outbreak of the Second World War (1939). For nearly two and a half centuries on the territory of Vojvodina, 231 Roman Catholic religious buildings were built, including 3 cathedrals, 184 parish churches and 44 covenant, family or cemetery chapels, in 166 towns and villages in Vojvodina. The main problems the research was focused in were the spatial concepts and correlation between form and function of these structures, origins and typology of architectural forms, the influence of the Central European centers and the surrounding areas and the ways in which discursive cultural, socio-political and religious climate manifested in architecture of studied ecclesiastical buildings. The theoretical framework of the research was a phenomenon of the contemporary, dominant national cultural policy - the discourse of official culture, art and architecture of the Monarchy (1745-1918.), later Austria (1804-1867.) and the Austro-Hungarian Empire (1867/1918.) on the one side and Christian theology, symbolism and liturgical paradigm as a determinant of architectural formation of the liturgical space on the other. A VII complex research process (22 archives and museums in 6 countries) and an extensive analysis of information on the researched subject (414 used and referent bibliography units and 88 units of published sources, archival documents and records and Schematisms were collected) preceded the definition of general theoretical knowledge. Photo and technical documentation of the interior and exterior of the current situation for most of the studied objects (162) was completed during three years terrain research period. Having studied a large number of examples and having observed them from different value aspects the exemplary that is representative buildings were sorted out. Beside formal archtectural nature, architectural expression, style and historical significance, the examples were chosen by the role of an sacral object in the urban space of a village as well as the role of the object within the church organization. As a final result of the research, a typological systematization of the studied objects was presented according the specific features of the spacial concept, the other formal architectonic characteristics, as well as according correlation of a building with its immediate and wider environment. Seven major typological groups were sorted out. The key factors that determine a type were defined as: a) plan development, as a result of the internal functional spatial organization, b) use of constructions in the function of an interior design, c) architectural composition that determines the mass of the outer volume and d) social climate and urban contextual factors. Architectural language in interior and exterior design, determined by dominant style in architecture, turns out not to be crucial for systematization of the architectural types. However, the dominance of certain styles in certain time periods determines not only the application of the style and decoration, but also the character of the internal space. Correlation of a sacral building to the wider environment had great importance in the study of transmission and flow of influence and allows geographic hedging and paving the main changes in the period. Applied Matrix method, including a systematic study of each researched object according eight established criteria, has completely confirmed the hypotheses set at the beginning. The investigation work conducted on the spatial concept of Roman Catholic churches built during the 18, 19. and VIII the first decades of the 20. century (1699-1939.) in Vojvodina can identify the evolution of thought and the guiding principle of the spatial organization solutions and the dominant style in ecclesiastical architecture during the researched period.