The main purpose of the research conducted in the doctoral dissertation is to evaluate
the impact the use of wood has on the ecological propriety of houses in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Scientific research proved that there is a direct connection between the
mode and form of the use of wood and ecological propriety of houses.
To do the evaluation, an algorhytm was formed, based on which the assessment was
made. At the beginning of the whole process the reference housing type was selected
along with variant reference types that will be subject to valuation.
A typical family house built in Bosnia and Herzegovina has been determined the
main reference type, based on which additional three variant reference types were
formed, to be subject to valuation. The reference type Т constitutes the typical family
house with the elements of structure used in classical mass building system, whereas the
reference type Т represents the ecologically more advanced variant where wood is used
to a somewhat larger extent. The variant reference types Т and Т are formed of
structure elements where wood is used in their construction, thus T represents a
building with Easy Panel elements used as wall elements and interfloor constructions,
and Т refers to a building with portable elements оf CLT panels.
The assessment was made by valuating certain elements, and thereby the whole
building by applying the software eco2soft, selected as in Bosnia and Herzegovina there
are no models or tools to be used for the valuation process. The valuation process was
carried out in two phases: firstly, the thermal layer of the building was valuated (phase
BG0), аnd then the whole building (phase BG3). The valuation process set definitions
for the life cycle phase of a house for which the assessment is made, from „cradle to
gate“ for the phase BG0, while the phase BG3 also included the impacts of
maintenance. The time period for which maintenance impacts were valuated is 100
years, but valuations were also made in the periods of 25, 50 and 75 years so as to in
more detail assess the impacts made during the maintenance of house elements and their
connection to the building materials used.
The process of valuating houses and elements of their structure proved that the use of
wood may improve the ecological propriety of houses, primarily those intended for
families, but likewise that certain results may also be applied on all houses.
Improvement of ecological propriety of houses means less negative impact of houses
on the environment and the occupants, whether it be caused by production or use.
Evaluation of the impact the use of wood has on ecological propriety of houses may
significantly affect the increase of volume and way in which wood is used, which will
also contribute to the economic development.