A monastery is a union of a built structure, of consecrated life and the overall space in which that life unfolds. Always having a spiritual mission, monasteries may have a status of a cultural or a natural property, categorized as a property of national significance or as a world heritage site. In Kosovo and Metohija (either in function, in the form of architectural remains or as a part of the old tradition) there are about 1500 holy places (monasteries, churches and cemeteries) which bear witness to the Orthodox spirituality and history of the Serbian nation throughout the ages. The unity of the Serbian state and the Serbian church achieved during the rule of the Nemanjic dynasty has reflected in the church art, in original architectural styles and urban forms, where the church building was always in centre of the free space of the churchyard enclosed with the structures built around it. Among all of the significant monasteries in Kosovo and Metohija, in the decades between 20th and 21st centuries, there are fifteen of them that stand out as the most important monasteries for the Serbian Orthodox Church (according to the book Legacies of Kosovo), for the Serbian state (according to their protection status, mainly protected as monuments of culture) and for the Church and the State together (according to the platform for the State Negotiations held in Vienna in 2006/2007). In addition to the destruction during the Ottoman rule, the monasteries were also destroyed in the wars in the first half of 20th century, while at the same time being exposed to the attacks of the local Albanian population. After World War II, the monastery property was dispossessed by the legislation which was passed within the new social establishment of the state. Under the circumstances following the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999, the UN Resolution 1244 and the arrival of the international forces, 129 sacred places, 34 of which during the 2004 March riots, were destroyed in Kosovo and Metohija in ethnically motivated attacks. The international missions (UNESCO, Council of Europe) confirmed the destruction of the Serbian historical, spiritual and cultural heritage after which the UNESCO inscribed the 8 monasteries Decani, Gracanica, and the Patriarchate of Pec on the UNESCO’s World Heritage List. The attacks created a need to establish protective zones around the Serbian holy sites, primarily for the sake of their safety. For the purpose of the State Negotiations held in Vienna in 2006, experts from Serbia prepared a Project for the protection of 39 complex cultural sites with 24 monasteries. This was followed by Annex V of the Ahtisaari Plan for religious heritage with certain shortcomings in the establishment and monitoring of the zones, which the Serbian experts explained through analyses in the new Project for the State Negotiations held in Vienna in 2007. This did not prevent the international community from supporting the consequent so-called legislation on special protective zones enacted by the professionally unprepared provisional institutions of Kosovo. The Ahtisaari Plan also gave support to the reconstruction of the Serbian church buildings through a Memorandum, which the Serbian Orthodox Church on signed two occasions with the same provisional institutions of Kosovo, in the presence of UNMIK. The implementation of the Memorandum is led by the Council of Europe. In addition to this example, this thesis also considers the model of the reconstruction of the monastery Banjska throughout the 20th century, first when the research works ended in the restoration of the church building and later with the conservation of the architectural remains, without revitalization of the life in monastery, which will, as a model of a sustainable renewal process, take place only at the beginning of the 21st century. The preparation of the urban-planning Project for the unified monastery, the settlement and the spa of Banjska has confirmed an integrative approach to reconstruction of cultural heritage through cooperation between the Serbian Church and the Serbian state institutions. The establishment of the protective zones was considered taking into account the church rules from the Synaxis of Jerusalem in 50 A.D., through the Holy Canons of the Church and the monastic rules, to the contemporary Serbian legislation on cultural and nature heritage, urban planning and construction, and churches and religious communities. Consideration was also given to international conventions in the sphere of the protection of cultural, natural and intangible heritage, UNESCO’s criteria on determining the 9 universal values and UNOSEK criteria used in the discussions within the State Negotiations held in Vienna. Three areas of protection have been established, with a possibility of their further division, all unified within the Liturgical function. These are the unchangeable protective zones of the monastery itself (altar of the temple, the temple, churchyard, peripheral built structure or external walls), protective zones surrounding the monastery (monastery’s properties, urban areas and cultural landscape) and special protective zones (sacral space and sacral time). The research has also established the criteria for determining the protective zones through the questions of procedure and then the technical criteria for each of the three zone areas of protection individually. The establishment and management of the protective zones must be carried out with a full consent of the Serbian Orthodox Church and the institutions of the Republic of Serbia, with a harmonized application of the Holy Canons of the Church, the Serbian legislation and international Conventions. This complex process of establishing protective zones of the monastery requires an involvement of experts in the fields of the history of art, architecture and urban- planning, and especially connoisseurs of monastic life.