The work will propose the unconventional process for the design of NURBS spatial
structures, which integrates methods for fabrication of physical models Rapid
Prototyping and methods for 3D optical strain measurement, in the process of
conception the design solutions. Defining such a procedure would allow more simple
and more efficient design of unconventional NURBS structures. Rapid Prototyping
represents a technology that is constantly evolving and whose potential is still not
enough exploited in the process of designing architectural forms. Within the framework
of this paper constructed models will be used in the process of structural analysis.
Diagnostics of structural behavior in terms of strain and stresses is imposed as a
necessary step of validation of the results of computer analysis using finite element
method when it comes to unconventional solutions, and is a logical step that precedes
the phase of the building of real structure. The application of these technologies would
ensure finding rational solutions in a structural terms.
The work is based on the view that the using potentials of the advanced digital
technologies and multidisciplinary approach enables the improvement of the design
process. Numerous examples of extremely successful architectural projects realized on
these principles confirm validity of this approach. A constant development of digital
technologies, in terms of improvement of performances, opens up the possibility of
introducing certain technologies, which are not initially intended for the process of
architectural design, in the process of solving of architectural-engineering problems.
With the remark that achieving quality results is equally conditioned by knowledge of
the problem and the technology used for its solution. It is imposed to the architecture to
refine the means for production out of the framework of its field. In this sense, it is
considered justified use of the proposed scientific method that can be applied for
designing unconventional NURBS structures.
Starting from the theory of beam and surface bearing elements in the general Spline
parametric NURBS coordinates a series of isogeometrci Kirchhoff shell elements and
Bernoulli Euler beam elements of arbitrary continuity is formulated in the work, which
was not possible by classical isoperimetric approach. Generalized coordinates of these
elements are purely translation displacements of the points on the rod axis and the
points on the middle surface of the shell. These elements accurately describe the
original geometry of the mentioned structures which results in efficient strain and stress
analysis with a relatively small number of both finite elements and degrees of freedom
of displacements.