The geodesic dome belongs to a wider group of polyhedron dome-shaped structures. Its structure contains triangulate mesh of members, which forms the basis of its stiffness and stability, together with the spherical form. On the other hand, a polyhedron dome-shaped structure with sides that are not in triangular form can be stable if it is formed from surface structural elements or from such a structural configuration of linear elements, which provides its sides a stable and undeformable shape. In this context, the formation of the polyhedron dome sides comes down to generating a stable structural system in its plane. The considered structural system is formed from rigid members and soft suspension rods arranged in two layers and separated by a span piece. By changing the length of the span piece, the formed structural system is prestressed. The necessary stiffness is obtained, as well as the evident stability. Aforementioned structural system represents a functional element, which can be industrially produced. Thus greater precision and quality is achieved in its production and it may be rational in the construction of the dome structures. Further rationalisation of the application of functional elements in the construction of polyhedron structures is enabled by the transformation of its geometry. The polyhedron structure formed of functional elements requires defining the specific principles of design and functional organisation. The geometry of the polyhedron dome-shaped structure can be generated by multiplying a polygon or a group of polygons around another polygon. Various forms and combinations of those polygons can generate different geometry of polyhedron domes. IV Generating polyhedron domes geometry is enabled by the analysis of knowledge so far in the field of generating forms (tessellation of the Euclidean plane) and polyhedron systems, with regular polygons. This creates the basis for further research and extension of the classification of polyhedron dome irregularly formed. The performed classification of polyhedron domes must fulfil not only the geometric design principles, but also the static-constructive design principles, which leads to the improvement of the planning process and realisation of rational dome- shaped structures, with the better use of resources. The research results show that a very rational polyhedron dome-shaped structure can be formed of prestressed functional elements, whose contour members are made of wood. The basic advantages of such structures are low consumption of materials, simple system of interconnected functional elements, independent determination of the level and span of dome-shaped structures, the formation of the supporting structures of simple geometry, etc.