This research focuses on improvement of the open public space designing process achieved by application of principles of quantum architecture. For purpose of establishing a connection between quantum architecture and open public spaces, the research has been expanded into the framework of open urban dynamic systems, constructor theory, post-critical design phenomenon, non-place, acculturation, and mixed realities field. First part of the doctoral thesis studies quantum architecture, a relatively new spatial paradigm, as well as several theories, phenomena, and methodological tools quantum architecture is connected to. Critical analysis of works based on Christopher Alexander’s self- conscious and unselfconscious designing process led to conclusions on approach of users of built environment toward architectural and urban design. It also analyzes Nicholas Negroponte’s Theory of Architecture Machines, which in a visionary way anticipated many processes that are present in architecture today and which, by its structure, may be associated with quantum architecture and structure of the model presented in the thesis. Phenomenon of open systems of urban process, with focus on Jay Forrester’s open dynamic system, was also shown in the research, as well as the iteration process and self-regulatory system. Research explores the process of post-critical design as well, which correlates, in its essence, to the process generated by quantum architecture. In the part of the research directly addressing the theoretical settings of quantum architecture, the doctoral thesis lists and describes John Lobell’s principles of quantum architecture as the basis for setting the paradigm. It describes the relationship between the phenomena of real, virtual and quantum from the architectural perspective, and it indicates mixed reality as a basic tool for application of quantum architecture principles. It describes the phenomenon of quantum city, a research that is a result of combination of quantum theory and various urban processes, especially emphasizing the role of a user, quantum city’s open systems, and the relationship between linear deterministic and open nondeterministic processes of built environment designing. At the end of the first part of the research, the phenomenon of quantum architecture was placed in a social context and associated with concepts of acculturation and non-place, which are represented as a potential result or a consequence of quantum architecture’s effect. IX The second part of the thesis explores the theoretical settings of the open public spaces phenomenon. It describes public life and users’ attitude toward it, i.e. toward the city’s open public spaces. It deals with methodological principles of open public space designing process, and with the research on relationship between digital media, networked society, and urban space. In the part of the research focused primarily on physical aspects of open public spaces, special attention was given to the theoretical work of Jan Gehl and Bill Hillier, and reconciliation, by use of quantum architecture, of two, to certain extent, opposite approaches. The research partly relies also on the theory of structuration of Anthony Giddens, and the work of Henri Lefebvre. The research, in the part that describes the approach of digital media toward city’s public open spaces, investigates the phenomenon of urban public environment as a non-physical place, i.e. it explores virtual or digital aspect of open public spaces in the phenomenological sense. Third part of the text in the thesis defines models of application of principles of quantum architecture in process of designing of open public spaces. It demonstrates the basic concept and structure of David Deutsch’s philosophical constructor theory, and it correlates the concept with open dynamic systems and iteration process, in order to define a model that would allow application of quantum architecture principles when designing architectural and urban spaces. It defines the elements of design that make up the aforementioned model, and it further defines two models that represent theoretical simulation of the model of use of constructor theory and quantum architecture in architecture and urban design. The text also explores and describes the potential new role of a user and a new role of an architect in the quantum architecture environment. It also defines the concept of a method of quantum architecture design. The final part of the doctoral thesis describes and defines methodological principles of open public space designing process with application of pre-defined models of correlations between principles of quantum architecture, constructor theory, and an open dynamic system. Basic settings and principles of quantum architecture, new role of a user, and a new role of an architect, where combined with explored methodological principles of urban environment designing. The relationship is defined between the model of quantum architecture designing methods, and open public space designing. This relationship is further illustrated by four models that enable application of quantum architecture principles on designing process of open public spaces. Also, quantum architecture principles and their use in process of X designing of open public spaces are further described at the end of the third part of the doctoral thesis. Scientific contribution of the research presented in the thesis refers to improvement of the quantum architecture research by establishing a parallel with city’s open dynamic systems, especially by defining correlations between quantum architecture and the constructor theory. Improvement was achieved thanks to the connection between elements of an open dynamic system and elements of a constructor that resulted in a model that allows application of principles of quantum architecture in the field of architecture and urbanism. The defined model is then linked to the theoretical research on city's open public spaces, which eventually resulted in creation of models of improvement of the open public space designing process. Additional scientific contribution is reflected in a potential social impact of quantum architecture, i.e. in its relationship with sociological phenomenon of non-place and the acculturation process. Quantum Architecture is also associated with the process of post- critical design. Practical application of the research presented in the thesis is interconnected with the application of the model of open public space quantum architecture in space of mixed realities. This model could be used in designing of various software applications for devices that enable displaying of mixed reality environments. This study is the foundation for numerous future researches that may go in direction of direct upgrade of defined models, or toward creation of new models with specific features they might have depending on the territory they cover. The study presented in the doctoral thesis requires further improvements in the field of mixed reality. New roles of an architect and a user in the area of quantum architecture represent the foundation for potential change and upgrade of the paradigm in the process of architectural education, and change in perception of the very concept of architecture in general. Use of architect’s new role and expansion of his sphere of activity toward active processes in real time might lead to a more active research of the connection between programming, coding, and architecture. Partial equalization of real and virtual spaces, which redefines dimensions of time and distance, raises many questions that require additional researches in the field of architecture and urban planning, as well as in the sphere of technology, sociology, philosophy, law, and politics. XI