Urban Aesthetics is the frame of reference of the thesis – it begins with its foundation and principles, and they remain present throughout the study through exploration of the extent and the methods of their implementation in the practice of urban planning and urban design, i. e. in the aesthetic analysis and regulation. Bearing in mind the chaotic urban practices in our country and low aesthetic quality of urban landscape of many cities, this study is a contribution to improvement of this situation in the case of the aesthetic aspect of the analysis and regulation which affect the shaping of the urban landscape of City of Belgrade. The chosen research subject is examined in a comprehensive and systematic manner. Its main factors are aesthetic analysis for the purpose of regulation and the aesthetic aspect of the regulation. The established fact of absence of channeled, controlled and completed urban landscape of Belgrade, with the high level of attained aesthetic quality, resulted in relational hypothesis that methodology of aesthetic analysis and implementation of aesthetic criteria, as well as its results, in the regulation of urban planning practice of City of Belgrade is not clearly defined. It is complemented with the assertion that the extent of application of the preliminary aesthetic analysis as well as the existence of the aesthetic aspect in regulation is minimal. Based on all presented cases, the informations and relations between them, the hypothesis is confirmed in concluding remarks. The contribution of this study to urban planning, urban design and urban aesthetics, is defined in its objectives and expressed through the function of scientific knowledge, through scientific explanation (emphasizing the concept of the creative process of analysis, planning and regulation which leads to shaping the urban landscape with the aesthetic quality, exploring the manner (methodology) of implementation of urban aesthetics in the production of urban landscape in Serbia, in particular, in Belgrade, in regulation and its v implementation, as well as possibilities for its improvement) and systematization (shaping the theoretical foundation which could be applied in urban planning practices and regulation in order to obtain better feedback from the public, as well as summarizing the recommendations/guidelines from successful international examples to improve the aesthetic aspect of the analysis and regulation in local practice). In addition to these main objectives, the contribution to the development of objective criteria for analysis (criticism and evaluation) and synthesis (planning and design) is important, too. They are defined and systematized from the aesthetic principles, as well as principles related to walking /moving, cultural and social conditions that, all together, affect the aesthetic quality of the urban landscape. Aesthetic principles are of primary importance but the rest are also very important for the objectivity of the process of evaluation of the observed subject. Applied scientific methods and overall research methodology correspond to problem explained, to subject and objectives of the research as well as the complexity of the field of urban aesthetics, through which the aesthetic component of the urban landscape is broadly interpreted. When choosing the methods, it was important that their application answers to key questions - how to measure the presence of urban aesthetics in analyses and regulation, what is the indicator for the manner of implementation of aesthetic principles and criteria in the regulation as well as the indicator of the definition of the methodology of aesthetic analysis. Accordingly, the main methods used are document analysis (of conducted aesthetic analysis, plans, laws, decisions, regulation…) and synthesis of the data collected. Among other methods, the case study method is present, then comparative method, descriptive method and critical analysis. Through the comparative overview of international and Belgrade urban practice, a relation between required ('what and how should it be done') and existing ('how is it done') is explored. The results obtained by the key segments of the research are: for the theoretical basis - shaping the theoretical framework of the field of urban aesthetics, systematization of possible aesthetic principles and summary of the possible aesthetic criteria for regulatory purposes, for aesthetic analysis – summary of possible types, systematization of examples of performed analysis, identification and analysis of the methodology of their development, identification of the means of initiation of analysis (individual or vi institutional) and summary of the guidelines, arising from successful international examples, for the improvement of the current situation of the Belgrade practices, for aestetic regulation – summary of types of aestetic regulation, systematization of the examples of aestetic regulation and control, summary of the aesthetic criteria built into regulation (Belgrade  already implemented +required/possible) and summary of the guidelines for the improvement of the current situation of the Belgrade practice, and for the relation between aesthetic analysis and regulation - the identification of the existence/non- existence of the relation, identification and analysis of the methodology of the implementation of the results (aesthetic criteria) into the regulation and summary of the guidelines for improvement of the current situation of the Belgrade practice. At the end of the study, the results are qualitatively improved with analysis of the possibilities of their practical application in the urban planning practice of Belgrade – through the situation of 'ideal' application, but also specifying some of the real options. The subject of this doctoral dissertation is actual because it addresses the problems of the urban regulation from the aesthetic point of view, at a time when the realization of aesthetic/visual quality of cities is becoming increasingly important to the professionals and users alike. Until now, it had not been the subject of research in our science, therefore, this is the first serious study of the aesthetic aspect of the analysis and regulation. It especially stresses the importance of urban aesthetics, which in our scientific and professional literature, as a term and as a scientific discipline, has not been processed yet, then implementation of its principles and criteria in the regulation for shaping urban landscape and presentation of appropriate methodologies, as well as the opening the new research questions that lead to the upgrading of the knowledge in this field. An additional interdisciplinary socio-cultural-spatial discourse of the analysis is emphasized, which provides the holistic response to the major issues. The thesis has theoretical as well as practical dimension, i.e. its results represent the scientific and practical contribution at several levels. The intent of the study is to to be useful, through constructive analysis of the current situation in Belgrade, to those who bear the main responsibility for shaping its urban landscape. It will help, above all, experts from the primary fields of research - planners, vii urban designers, and architects, then social scientists and policy makers, in their understanding and evaluation of the aesthetic quality of the urban environment and the possibilities of its improvement through change and improvement of the presented factors of the subject of research and their relations. Development of the aesthetic aspect of urban analysis, regulation and control leads to the creation of the entirety of urban landscape as an expression of a common theme, that is, coordinated approach.