Process of globalization, initiated by information and technology revolution, as well as transportation costs reduction, has changed the role and position of the city. Cities, as smaller entities, have been more flexible and adaptable to globalization-related challenges, which led them to the leading positions over the weakened countries. Centers of national economy have grown into nodes through which global capital, information and people flow. Former system of national states has been replaced by global network of cities. Cities, moreover, have become easily replaceable and mutually competitive, which has become a prerequisite for the development and economic growth. Leading global cities are the ones with the highest concentration of global capital, in conjuction with political and social power. They top global hierarchies of urban centers. Underneath, cities are ranked according to their position and significance at the global market. Furthermore, period after 1980s has been marked by the transition from Fordist to post- Fordist economy. In the process of deindustrialization, leading position in city economy has been taken by the advanced services sector. Criteria for determining city’s position in global hierarchies of urban centers have been mostly based on concentration of international companies headquarters engaged in financial services, accounting, marketing, insurance, law and management. At the same time, post-Fordist economy has required flexible business making, openness to fast changes along with adaptability to demands, which all have brought innovation and creativity into the spotlight. Success comes only as a result of creative process. The beginning of 21st century was marked by growth of creative economy, its participation in overall global economy, its share in national and city incomes, as well as the political recognition of its importance for the future growth. Industries based on knowledge, cognitive information processing and individual and collective creativity were recognized by a large number of urban governments as the most important ones for city’s future competitiveness and its global position. Initial national and local policies based on importance of creative industries were followed by intense increase in number of scientific works, among which two stood out as the most popular. The first one presented the thesis of creative city importance; in other words - importance of a creative government and creative solutions to challenges of globalization and post-Fordizm. The second one stressed that the main resource of cities today is the creative class, along with the idea that cities should concentrat their efforts on improving their attractiveness to this group. Popularity of concepts has resulted in wide use in urban polices and strategies for development. At the same time, it induced a series of criticism, ranging from criticizing unfounded opinions unilateral approach, to highlighting the lack of understanding of context and time needed for creative city development. On the other hand, the initial concept was deepened and new theoretical approaches were formed. Among them, concepts which stood out were the ones stressing the importance of creative industry concentration in specialized clusters, together with creative milieu existence in the city, connections between art and science, as well as the importance of social relations and business conditions for the concentration of creative class. No matter the divergence of attitudes, they all shared common understanding about leading role of creative industry and creative individuals and groups in contemporary global economy. Creative industries and creative class have become leading elements of cities’ global competitiveness in the 21st century. The type of social interactions characteristic for cities only, has always made cities attractive for creative individuals; therefore, it is not surprising that, in large cities, creative industry is concentrated. Leading global cities are also leading centers of creative industries. There is an evident correlation between city’s position in global hierarchy or urban centers and, at one hand, level of creative industries’ development, and, on the other hand, concentration of the creative class in city. In the global trade, share of creative goods and services is closely associated to the positioning of the city. However, this correlation does not make one hundred percent; besides, creative industry is not getting developed to the same extent in all cities, especially in lower ranks of hierarchy. Not all cities can be, neither should be creative. Creative industries’ growing importance is visible in the criteria of global hierarchies of urban centers, where the focus has shifted towards the evaluation оf conditions which encourage innovation and creativity, such as technical infrastructure, concentration of talents, number of patents, investments placed in research and development, quality of life, etc. In order to analyze the role of creative city concept in city’s position enhancement in global hierarchies of urban centers, comparative analysis has been conducted, examining three European cities which improved their positions from 1986 to 2012. Those are cities of Helsinki, Vienna and Budapest, whose global competitiveness in the stated period was based on the creative city concept. It is concluded that enhancement of these cities’ positions in the hierarchy is a result of creative industry and class development, induced both by targeted activities and the spontaneous growth. Basic development principles that were applied were these ones: formation of creative incubators and clusters, financial support for research and development, improvement of education, raising the attractiveness of urban space and the quality of life in the city, aiming to attract the creative class. The conclusion is that cities were not focused only on the interpretation and implementation of one concept. Depending on distinctive local characteristics, trajectories of cities’ development, as well as spontaneous growth of creative industries, cities combined several different approaches – the most adequate ones. Success came as a result of thought-through operations of city government; not from plain application of measures proposed by popular authors, nor from direct copying of good practices. The results obtained by comparative analysis of the chosen cities have been examined through the case study of Belgrade. The analysis of Belgrade indicates the lack of creative city concept application in policies and strategies of urban development. This situation is partly a result of deficiency of national strategies related to creative economy. Concept has found its application in recent urban plans, but its implementation in urban projects and constructions is non-existent. On the other hand, it is evident that creative industries develop independently in Belgrade and that they form spontaneously specialized clusters in certain parts of the city. Belgrade has become globally recognized due to its creative industries and specific creative milieu. This doctoral dissertation defines typology of approaches to development of creative industries and class, which serves as a platform for the development of methods, specific for Belgrade. The set of measures and approaches that suits best local context, history and already present trajectories of creative industries development has been selected. The measures aim to accelerate and support city’s further development, rather than to impose new system. Only a tailored approach, with application of innovative solutions, will result in improving the Belgrade’s global competitiveness and enhance its position in global hierarchies. There are two main contributions of this his research. The scientific contribution is reflected in enhancement of theoretical understanding of the role that the creative city concept has in positioning in global hierarchies of urban centers. In addition, research of methodological approaches to the development of creative industries and creative class improves knowledge about the application of the concepts into strategies, plans and effects on the city’s position improvement. Practical contribution of this research is related to three European cities’ experience in developing a creative city, as well as the experience of Belgrade. Analysis of international experience contributes the understanding of the interrelationships between the national framework, local context and the applied set of measures for the development of creative industries and class. Key practical contributions are providing an overview of creative economy development in Belgrade, as well as redefining approaches to the improvement of its global competitiveness, by including creative city concept.