The doctoral dissertation tackles the study of architecture communication traits and properties, as a possible model for the interpretation of the meaning and experience of architecture works. The contemporary theory of architecture recognizes the move of focus of architecture contemplation as completed physical form to the space flows and interactions, hence as a place of complex communication that occurs in the process. The need for this reestablishment directs a research position, and is the subject of research focused on the analysis of capacity and architectural forms of communication. The communication feature of the architecture is realized through matter as a physical manifestation. However the same is created by human spirit, in the same manner as it is cognitively adopted. In this context, architectural communication can be understood as an area of intangible architecture. In this sense, one of the objectives of the dissertation is to promote architecture as a field of thought in realizing communicational values, and thus uphold as the artistic and creative discipline. The study shall entail two directions of research with regard to the communication traits of architecture which are defined as interior form of communication, methodological method for reading values of architectural works. Exterior architectural forms of communication refer to the meaning outside the architecture in the form of a more comprehensive context and culture in which the work is made and understood. We can understand it in the semantic system of meanings, and it is set to suit the experience of the external objective world. This form of communication is associated with the principles of representation in architecture, where the architectural language itself is perceived as a source of meaning hence, this line of communication properties leads to a narrow connection with the linguistic analogy. This way we contemplate the method of understanding architecture in the symbolical sense with the help of mimetic mechanisms and metaphor as an instrument of meaning and expression focusing on the values of narrative. Interior type of architectural communication relates to an aspect of subjective experience in the close interaction with the architectural space. This form of communication belongs to the phenomenological method of research that focuses on the testing of sensory phenomena, subjective experience, introducing layers of intuitive and unconscious, ephemeral phenomena architecture products, the issue of space-time perception. The phenomenological analysis in architecture, among other things, focuses itself on the way things are created and how to realize the interaction in terms of creating a certain atmosphere. The research shall be divided into two parts. The first part shall represent theoretical framework of researching communication traits of architecture. The second part shall represent qualitative research using the case studies on the example of works of the architect Zlatko Ugljen and focusing on the his design pursuant to the theoretical thesis. Using various research methods shall enable social and methodological scientific contributions. Application of research shall be seen as potential for application of theoretical foundation based on the communication traits of architecture for critical analyses and interpretation of architectural works as well as the bases for methodological approach in the architectural design.