Theoretical position of Doctoral Dissertation is situated in transdisciplinary research area of contemporary design practices in the field of structural engineering in architecture and it presents the scientific research about the use of recycled materials as factors of composite which can be used as a reinforcement bar or some other element in forming structural elements of architectural objects, and features an application of these materials in practice. The results of research include improving the design and realisation of construction, and structures of architectural objects, through introduction of new composite materials which encourage ecological quality of the building, which is in accordance with recommendations for sustainable construction. The aim of this research is to establish a practical relationship between existing composite materials data, the existing regulatory framework which defines the use of composite and experimental research of recycled fiber reinforced polymer composite. Methodological approach of this research was based on a scientific methodology and use comparative method as a comparison process of the same or related phenomena, or establishing similarities and differences among them. Analytical and mathematical method we use to define a relation between them, which can be verified with experimental methods which confirms the obtained characteristic parameters and vice versa that confirm adequacy of composite material that is experimentally tested. In the first part of the research the theoretical framework is set, references which provide insight in a field of composite formation where analysed as well as characteristic of composites, use of composites, and opportunities for implementing recycled materials in the manufacturing process of the composites, especially for fibre reinforced polymer composites. First, thesis define composite, its structure and applied materials, then it analyzes properties of polymer composites reinforced with fibres composted of material from primary production. Then, related data about materials which are suitable for recycling and use in production of composites from recycled materials are analysed. Second part of dissertation is designed as a study that consist of theoretical part which deals with the comparative analysis of references and literature of the existing legislative framework, rules and guidelines in the field that define the use of composite materials in structural engineering in architecture, and defining criteria which composite need to fulfil. Next part gives relations and an expression based on analysed literature and defined criteria, followed by experimental part which verifies the justification of the use tested recycled PET-glass fiber reinforced polymer composite in the formation structural elements of architectural structures. Experimental part was based on set of relations and expressions. Indirectly, it perceives potential of using recycled composite material in forming structural elements of architectural structures in general. The second part of Dissertation also provides evaluation of research results and gives suggestions for further use of experimentally tested recycled PET-glass fiber reinforced polymer material. The proposed hypothesis has been verified through analysis of data from the field of structural engineering in architecture, making relations and by experimental verification. Justification of this thesis stems from need to find new materials and their use, and at the same time caring about ecological factors, the impact on the ecosystem and sustainable development. The practical application of the results is to consider possibilities and guidelines for future research, as well as use of experimental tested recycled PET-glass fiber reinforced polymer composite for forming structural elements of architectural structures. In broad terms, contribution of a research consisted in analysing and understanding the ways in which a related research field can be adapted to contemporary changes of method of problem solving. In a narrow sense, thesis was conceived as a contribution of research in field of structural engineering in architecture. Contributions of research consists of analysing and understanding methods in which we are using composite materials in structural engineering of architectural objects, as well as considering the coverage of regulations in the field of structural engineering in architecture related to composites, also including setting the relation expressions which define the behaviour of composites in forming of structural elements of architectural structures, and the initial consideration which we need to examine the field of using recycled fiber reinforced polymer composite. Expected results of research are better and more complete scientific knowledge that is result from perceiving relations between subsystems of architectural structures, construction and construction materials, and also practical application should be able to ensure that issues that are raised by the increasingly strict environmental standards and to overcome and thereby achieve quality of design and construction of architectural objects, maintain it on the same level or, if possible, to improve.