The relevance of these research topics reflects the need for redefining the concept of nature in architecture in accordance with current environmental and climate issues, as well as with the changing position of nature in contemporary culture. Starting from Lefebvre's position that a complete environment is always socially produced, as well as from the fact that in our time there is no clear boundary between nature and culture, the paper argues that what is necessary for the research and improvement of the concept of nature in architecture is to shift the focus from things in space to the current production of space. Accordingly, the claim is that the production of space cannot be understood independently of the production of nature. Since space, time, and place, are relationally defined by processes, they depend on the characteristics of processes that simultaneously define and shape the environment. More specifically, the relationship of space-time cannot be investigated independently of the processes evoked in environmental and ecological actions. Keeping in mind that architecture and urbanism produce the environment for humans and at the same time study the relationship between people and their environment, the argument is that the architectural design is at the very core of the problem between humans, the environment, and the changes that occur in these relations. Considering these positions, the topics of the role and importance of the environment, both natural and built, its relationship with the user, as well as the mutual relations of natural and artificial, are among the most current in contemporary architectural theory and practice. Further, recent decades have seen a constant emphasis on the importance of behavioral knowledge and interpretation within architectural theory in order to achieve environmental and cultural sustainability, that is, harmony between architecture, nature, and users. However, there is still no developed practice of application of these methods and knowledge in architecture. Consequently, the main aim of the research is the study of quantitative and qualitative changes in the relations between architecture and nature. The research uses v environment-behavior theories and knowledge in order to bridge the gap between isolated individual behaviors and to synchronize personal interactions (researching this conditionality in the context of Belgrade). The text begins with the assumptions that architecture is not only the design of space, but the establishment of relations within this space (specifically the relation between nature, architecture and users), and that the implementation and application of behavioral knowledge in architectural practice contributes to the intensification and improvement of these relations. In accordance with the need to reassess the existing and to explore new forms of relations of architecture to nature, specifically as indicated by Harvey and Sloterdijk, the operational objective of the research is to examine the possibilities of improving the relations between architecture and nature in the dominant discourses of architecture and to create a basis through which, in the framework of a broader architectural production, the topics proposed by contemporary environmental- behavioral approaches could be examined. The assumption is that architectural practice can continuously improve its response to aspects of the environment, climate and place, as well as to the needs of contemporary society and culture, to the unpredictability of human behavior and characteristics of the local context. The selection of residential settlements for the research subject is defined by taking into account the complexity of the relationships between man and nature in residential architecture. Residential settlements enable a comparative study of the mentioned relations at different spatial scales, from the level of housing unit, to the level of neighborhood and block, both in the inner and outer space. In addition, such a choice of research field includes the study of local context, as an important aspect of environmental design approach. The general methodological approach, i.e. the basic theoretical orientation of this research, corresponds to the nature of the theme, or to the complex and transdisciplinary study of the spatial relations between man, architecture and nature, as well as to the entirety of the environment and the inseparability of nature and culture as its component parts. The dissertation makes use of the relevant theoretical paradigms of environment- behavior studies, determinism and interactionalism to explain the existence of different vi forms of architectural thinking about users, but also the entire environment (natural and built). The research was conducted through comparative analysis of given design positions and concepts of contemporary environmental architecture, an analysis of design positions in residential architecture of Belgrade, as well as the analysis of the relation of relevant environment-behavior phenomena and spatial levels. In this way, the dissertation shows that architectural practice for the given period includes two different modalities of architectural action in terms of environment- behavior paradigmatic positions, each of which assumes different qualities in relation to nature and the user. These two modalities are based on the deterministic and interactional paradigm, and generally correspond to the periods of modernism and post- modernism in Yugoslavia. The text elaborates on the difference between determinism and interactionism in architecture, that is, between a conceptual shift from the unidirectional and deterministic impact of the environment on people to a more complex interactional concept and the recognition that the relation between people and their physical environment is not as direct and causal as the deterministic paradigm suggests. What this elaboration shows is that the role of the environment-behavior theory in the architecture of this period is reflected in the complexity of user needs in architecture and the overall complexity of the environment. Further, the research shows that the residential architecture of Belgrade, and Yugoslavia in general, has a rich environmental history, which is due to specific historical conditions, resulting in complex, hybrid forms of approaches to the design of the environment. The architectural practice of the analyzed period clearly demonstrates the necessity for improvement and the need to raise awareness of the importance and role of environment-behavior knowledge in architecture; however, it also shows the limitations, the inability of adequate implementation and the narrow achievements of environment-behavior positions in the architecture of this period. Ultimately, the research shows that the concept of environmental architectural practice presupposes the establishment of a sensitive relation to the specific climatic and ecological, social and cultural context, and includes the use of various environment- behavior theories and methods in architectural design. vii Thus, the evaluation of the results indirectly suggests possibilities for improving the conception of nature in architecture, as well as the necessity of shifting the focus to a standpoint of transactional paradigm in the context of contemporary architectural theory and practice. A potential model for this is the concept of Third Nature. According to the concept of Third Nature, improving the concept of nature in architecture is founded on the adaptive logic of architectural practice, revealing the possibilities of transformation, expansion and improvement of environmental discourse in architecture, thus intensifying the relations between users, architecture and nature, which are impossible to consolidate within the common notion of the current conceptions of nature in architecture.