From a theoretical standpoint, this is an interdisciplinary doctoral thesis, combining contemporary design practices with their phenomenological interpretation using the notion of atmosphere of a space. The theme of the dissertation is a definition of the concept of architectural atmosphere, its theoretical interpretation through research of environmental art practice and its analysis through the study of everyday spaces in the designs of architect Vasilije Milunović. The main research objective is to establish a practical relationship between the practices of environmental art and architectural design, in order to open architectural design practice towards critical and research potentials of interdisciplinary and hybrid practices in artistic creation. The usefulness of the established relations is reflected in the possibility of interdisciplinary exchange of research tactics and techniques, as well as through the possibility of improvement of design practice through broadening of the area and of the media of research and work. The operational goal of the research, in terms of architectural work, is to point out the usefulness of studying a wide range of human behavior in everyday life, from what is known as performing the everyday, through rituals and routines, to forms of performance. The assumption is that architecture is considered a structural system of symbols in complex communicational and phenomenological constructs, as well as a multimedia textual phenomenon, which takes place in time intervals of constituting the individual and collective everyday. The general methodological theoretical position of this research is predominantly phenomenological (hermeneutic and interpretative), through which the research is conducted as qualitative interpretative research. Qualitative research assumes the involvement of researchers in the problem and the subject of research. In this case, the relevant position is the dual role of the author: as chronicler and actors of the event, which is a specific role and thus appropriate for qualitative research. The first part of the study sets a theoretical framework, followed by an analysis of the relevant concepts of architectural theory, the theory of environmental art and theory of everyday life. The final chapter of the theoretical study outlines the implications for the possibility of analyzing the ambiance of the quotidian. The second part of the thesis is conceived as qualitative research, consisting of four case studies in which previously proposed hypotheses are tested in real conditions. The concluding paragraphs are an overview of the research results obtained. Two methodological apparatuses were applied in relation to two parts of the research. The first, theoretical part of the research uses the method of analysis of sources and literature. Theoretical conclusions emerge through comparative analysis of primary materials offering the elements for defining criteria, which are the subject of the second part of the work. The second part of research uses a complex methodological system towards a better application of techniques, including collecting, systematizing of documentation and analysis of content related to the subject of research, architectural analysis of the design process of four selected case studies, simulation methods to study potentials of the architectural practice spread through the synthesis of related practices in the arts. The theoretical framework is set through the examination and systematization of relevant theoretical approaches. The proposed hypotheses are verified through an analysis of relevant texts in the field of architectural phenomenological theory, the theory of environmental art and theory of everyday life. The concept of the architectural atmosphere is explained as a broader term in relation to the phenomenological model of heightened perception, as defined in the book Phenomenology of Perception (Phenomenologie de la perception, 1945) by Maurice Merleau–Ponty, and further developed by Juhani Pallasmaa in contemporary architectural theory. Problems of experience in architecture are considered from the point of analysis of the importance of a multi–sensory experience in the field of architecture and the way we think about it, how we perceive space and the way in which we create a space (architecturally). The analysis of definition of the environment in the practices of environmental art by Allan Kaprow, Claes Oldenburg and Ilya Kabakov allowed for the identification of key aspects of possible applications of the practice of environmental art. A theoretical interpretation of the subject of research (housing objects in Belgrade) is realized through the analysis of the schema that constitutes the phenomenological line of thought by Henri Lefebvre, and problematizes the idea of everyday practices and tactics, and the term "space" and "place" by Michel de Certeau. Set this way, the theoretical concept was examined through an analysis of key examples (representative case studies). Analysis of the theory of multi– sensory experience and its role in the development of concepts is placed in focus of the research through architectural design. The starting point of the research of the design process is a preliminary overview of the overall authorial practice of architect Vasilije Milunović, professor at the Faculty of Architecture in Belgrade. Case studies are examples for the analysis of the design process of everyday spaces in the projects for residential buildings in Belgrade, Republic of Serbia: conceptual design for a residential building on 23, Topolska street, municipality of Vračar, the conceptual design for a residential building on 10, Serdar Jola street, municipality of Stari Grad, conceptual design for a residential building on 9, Tolstojeva street, municipality of Savski Venac. The possibility of application of the practice of environmental art in architecture is based on three basic characteristics that are the cornerstone for research of space: (1) the primacy of space in environmental arts, (2) focus on the spectator and his experience of space, (3) the possibility of interpreting scenes of everyday life through environmental art. These three characteristics of environmental practices are explored through examples of spaces in selected case studies. An overview of the principal spatial atmospheres is offered, based on the analysis of case studies, which are then presented as everyday scenes and potential rituals of everyday life that could be "performed" and analyzed. Each case study provides the opportunity for the identification of a complex critical attitude towards the existing social quotidian. What is shown this way is that contemporary architecture has design practices similar to practices of environmental art, and that an introduction of environmental art in architecture can enable the active role of architecture in the interdisciplinary field of artistic practice in contemporary culture, in order to expand the field of design techniques and strategies. Evaluation of the results indicate the possibility that the concept of atmosphere in architecture can follow dynamic qualitative and quantitative changes of the social quotidian, its rituals and routines, and, that in this way, it can continuously improve responses of architectural practice to the needs of contemporary society and culture. Justification of this work stems from the need for theoretical research in the field of architectural design and contemporary architecture, and the necessity for development of contemporary architectural design practice. The practical application of the results consists in the possibility of including architectural practices in interdisciplinary practice in the field of art, as well as the possibility of transformation and transfiguration of environmental art practices in architecture. In a broader sense, the contribution of the research consists in analyzing and understanding the ways in which similar research areas adapt to ongoing changes of the research and cultural context. In a narrower sense, the work is a contribution to research in the field of architectural design.