The research behind the thesis is focused on establishing the potential for industrial build- ings built in Belgrade prior to World War II to be reused as offices. Current literature on the topic provides only limited information on which type of industrial buildings is most suited for adaptation into offices. In addition, in Serbia, the practice of building preserva- tion, which would include energy optimisation, is yet to be established. The main research hypothesis states that, with the adequate improvement of the fabric and the interior of existing industrial buildings, it is possible to create comfortable inter- nal conditions with a low energy demand. Through the selected methodology and assess- ment criteria, it is possible to establish which types of industrial building are best suited for office use. And, through analyses, it could be established which energy optimization measures are likely to create most comfortable internal conditions, as well as meet the current regulations for the new function. Energy and internal comfort requirements of office buildings have been established through the analyses of functional requirements of office buildings, and through a thor- ough review of the current regulations and the criteria of building certification systems. According to the above requirements, the adaptation potential of industrial buildings has been established. Through the analyses of London case studies, the thesis assesses the potential of different industrial typologies to be reused as energy efficient offices. Belgrade’s industrial heritage has been classified according to the type of industry it orig- inally belonged to, as well as its potential eligibility for adaptation into offices. Two ref- erence models, with representative characteristics of Belgrade’s industrial heritage, have been adopted for further analysis. Through computer simulations, the impact of individual envelope-improvement strate- gies, natural ventilation and the reduction of artificial lighting due to daylighting avail- ability, have been assessed. The analyses covered different ways of integration of re- newable energy systems, and their potential impact on building’s total energy demand. Thermal analyses have been conducted using IES-VE software. DIVA for Rhino was used for daylighting simulations. Renewable energy simulations were conducted using RETScreen software. VIII After the analyses, the thesis offers recommendations for the achievement of energy opti- mization, according to the current regulations, as well as improvements going well above the current standards, with the aim of maximizing the CO reduction. 2 Through the use of the prescribed methodology, the starting hypotheses have been proven and the research goals have been met. More precisely, the research established the refer- ence models of adaptation of industrial buildings, built in Belgrade prior to World War II, into offices, with optimal energy performance and according to which the quality of future interventions, as well as the selection of improvement strategies, can be assessed. The research contributions include the identification and systematization of characteris- tics of existing industrial buildings relevant for adaptation into energy efficiency office building, as well as the recommendations for achieving energy optimization in the pro- cesses of adaptation and conservation of industrial buildings.