The process of constant changes of social, spatially physical, technically technological and economic frames, reflects on the functionally physical structure of contemporary residential buildings. It actually initiates faster development of new approaches and redefinition of traditional residential concepts. The development and application of the transformobility concept is essentially connected to the fact that the traditional concept of residential architecture is not adapted to the circumstances of a contemporary resident and his needs which, besides those predictable, can often be unspecified and unknown. The applicability of designing principles is changing, at the same time questioning the design patterns of contemporary residential buildings. This work emphasizes the importance of application of transformation principles6 in the development of architectural design methodology of contemporary residential buildings and it also raises new analytical questions which lead to upgrading of knowledge in the field of the design process. Research and analysis of the transformation principle, based on architectural design, emphasizes the importance of identification of the basic characteristics which define the structure of the concept of transformobile7 residential buildings, which are able to adapt to constant changes caused by the needs of today’s users and by the environment. The aim of the application of the transformability concept is the improvement of the functionality of a building, and that is why this research is dedicated to the establishing and explanation of the transformation principles which are applied in the architectural design of contemporary residential buildings in the conceptual phase8 of their project, actually it is dedicated to the difficulties of the design of buildings which can be transformed even after they were built. 6 The concept refers to the physical transformation of inner spatial plan and the transformation of the object membrane, i.e. it is about the spatially physical modifications which are accomplished by the changes in the position, shape and structure of the characteristic elements of transformation. 7 The term “tranformobile residential buildingsž refers to the objects which can be transformed, changed and adapted even after they were built. 8 The application of transformation principles, on the conceptual level of designing decisions, represents a part of notional designing strategy, where the assigned goals of transformobility of a residential structure are being accomplished. The analysis of the transformation concept of contemporary residential buildings is being done through the analysis of referential examples9, according to the previously noticed transformation models and the key influences on the concept development. The examples are analyzed on the basis of applied transformation of inner space plan and transformation of object membrane, whereas the functional analysis of the structure of residential spaces is not emphasized, but this research attempts to establish the principles which, if applied, will help for diverse functions and forms to be accomplished. In other words, it is aimed at noticing the basic transformation elements10 which are used in the process of accomplishment of the concept of transformation This scientific research deals with the physical and perceptual transformation of residential structures, whereas it must be emphasized that the visual and physical transformation are dependent on each other and inseparable. However, the physical transformation of an object, which relates to spatial - mechanical movement of the basic constructive elements, is dominant and the main topic of this work. This research also intends to explain the role of transformation principles in architectural design of contemporary residential buildings and to encourage further research in this field, in order to develop and improve the application of the transformation principles in the conceptual phase of a design and to fulfill specific needs of a modern resident, as well as to absorb other influences that make traditional residential architecture not flexible enough.