The first part of this dissertation is devoted to identifying the mandatory program elements arising out of the most important religious ceremony that takes place in the Christian Orthodox church – Liturgy, as well as other requirements. The intent is to determine whether those elements arise from the liturgical needs of the Church or they have non-theological nature, and which factors influence on their formulation. The Church isin the basic sense a liturgical assembly, and a church – temple – is primarily liturgical, worship space. Liturgy is the basic and key factor in formulation of Orthodox church building programmatic basis, in relation to which all other influencing factor and programmatic elementsare of secondary importance. The symbolic part of the architectural program of Orthodox churches is also very significant, but it cannot be directly translated into architectural form. The canons of the Christian Orthodox Church are not in any way conditioning directly the architectural design of temples. Declaring some elements of architectural traditions and the established modern architectural practices as “canonical“, even without foundation in the theology, hinders the quest for the contemporary expression in religiousarchitecture. Contemporary architectural praxis of Orthodox and other Christian churches testify about the importance of the problem of the relationship to tradition, whether it is copied, developed or rejected. The conflict of traditionalist and modernist opinions and praxis in the approach to church architecture, and also the liturgical and theological issues, are more prominent among Roman Catholics and Protestants, but are also present withinthe Orthodoxchurches. Intertwining of religious and national identity of the Orthodox Serbs contributed to the situation that orthodox temples become, from the representation and symbol of religious teaching and tradition, perhaps even to a greater extent, a symbol of national identity and tradition. Traditionalist approach and historicist expression predominate in contemporary architectural design praxis of Serbian Orthodox Church. By insisting on the superficial, strictly formal qualities of historic architecture as the immutable and binding values one of the essential characteristics of tradition – its constant renewal and continuity of changes from generation to generation – is abolished. Instead of tradition and traditional approach, traditionalist one, which isopposite tothem isthussupportedand nourished. This field of architectural creation in Serbia, dating from 1990 to the present, which is the period analyzed in this dissertation, but also from the previous period of socialist state, is not yet sufficiently explored. The second part of the dissertation is devoted to the analysis of contemporary design praxis and poetics of the most prominent authorsinthisfield inourcountry, bythe number or qualityofthe realized churches in the last three decades – Lj. Bošnjak, R. Prokić, P. Ristić, Lj. Folić, S. Krunić, M. Lukić, B. Mitrović, M. Mitrović, B. Pešić and N. Popović. Most authors cherish the traditional – mimetic or dynamic – type of poetics. However, there are significant differences among them, because they rely on different elements of tradition, thus indicating indirectly to the freedom of creation in the field of Orthodox church architecture.