Through explorations of various types of planar curves and surfaces generated as locus of points with constant sum/product of distances to the focus, it was shown that there also exist geometric forms that are locus of points with constant sum/product of distances to the directrix. Due to such genesis, one could obtain a connection between focal and directorial geometric forms with Palladio’s proportional system, as well as with Fermat-Weber’s set of points, i.e. with Weber’s location problem. In addition, analysis of these elements led to observations of their connections with some geometric polygonal inequalities, which then led to introduction of a transitory element type. This transitory type of an element is called focal-directorial generated element (focal-directorial curve and focal-directorial surface). At the beginning of this dissertation, a generalization of the transitory type of planar curves with a constant sum of distances was attained, i.e. Weber’s focal-directorial curve was defined. Transitory type of curves with a constant product was introduced as Weber’s focal-directorial curve of Cassini’s type. In 3-D space, generation of the curves was accomplished based on three geometric terms (point – focus; line – directrix line and plane – directorial plane). Combination of basic terms, led to transitory types of surfaces with constant sums of distances, which were referred to as: Weber’s focal-directorial surface and Weber’s directorial-directorial surface. Transitory types of surfaces with constant product of distances are defined in a similar manner as the aforementioned surfaces and are referred to using the same terminology, with the note that they are of Cassini’s type. Weber’s surface and Weber’s surface of Cassini’s type are the terms used for surfaces generated using all three geometric terms. All 3D elements generated this way were illustrated graphically (three orthogonal projections and axonometric representation). In this manuscript, certain forms of focal-directory geometric forms are analyzed in terms of their dependencies on initial parameters. Also, geometric properties and order of 2D and 3D elements generated this way were examined. These elements were classified and a diagram of their classification is enclosed. мр Маја Петровић IV