Due to radical shifts of society concepts during the last two centuries,
areas such as the mountain region of Eastern Serbia have frequently
experienced developmental discontinuity from the aspect of logic of spatial
action and events, i.e. the formation of the culture of environment shaping.
The motivation for research into the possibility of revitalization of centres in
villages and specific rural areas can be found in the attempts at identifying the
correct development code. The said code would include, on one hand, their
existing natural and artificial resources, and on the other hand, the matrix of
correct spatial intervention. This research represents the examination of the
possibility for preservation of inherited ambient values and traditional
manifestations of customs in rural communities through respect and correct
channelling of the influences of contemporary urban, sociological, economic,
demographic and other phenomena, needs, and occurrences in the society.
Within the scope of this paper- research model, we have reviewed eight
rural settlements in Eastern Serbia, with a comprehensive analysis of one of
them – the primary settlement, while the remaining ones were treated as
secondary models, and their basic characteristics and potentials were used for
comparison purposes, as well as for the purposes of calculating relevant results.
The primary model was analysed as a characteristic representative of the both
typical and by many aspects specific settlement. The social, economic and
spatial circumstances provided a context for the analysis of spatial changes
during a sequence of defined historical periods, from the agrarian, through
craft-oriented, to industrial society and the current transition era. We have
highlighted the characteristic phenomena in the architecture of centres as
apartment buildings, and especially as public facilities, as well as their position
in the wider context, i.e. in the light of formation of top-quality tourism clusters.
They would be based on the existing natural and anthropogenic resources and
potentials in the community, as well as on the new supposed hierarchical
settlement network, with new centres in rural areas, independent of the existing
administrative organization and illogical territorial affiliations.
As in the case of other areas and settlements situated in them, inactive
adequate action programmes focusing on the mountain region of Eastern
Serbia, and the villages centres themselves, do exist, and they would be able to
contribute to a faster exit from stagnation and crisis, as well as to the alleviation
of long-standing depopulation and deagrarization. The theoretical framework
for proposal of principles of appropriate approach to future development and
action in spatial planning and modelling of specific sensitive rural spaces will
be developed in line with the degree of credibility of the starting hypotheses,
i.e. the positively assessed established research objectives.
Well-formulated professional action in mountain regions of eastern
Serbia, especially in the form of properly identified and selected central
functional points in settlement networks, would accomplish sustainable
revitalization of deteriorated and depopulated settlements. Consequently, we
would witness the activation of untapped natural and artificial resources in the
gravitation zones around centres, based on designed organized programmes,
which would, in turn, provide an opportunity for modern and sustainable
development of rural areas and settlements located in them.