The dissertation describes the role of the comprehensive urban plan in the
process of local development in Serbia after the democratic changes of 2000. It is an
empirical study of the system of urban planning and local management systems,
focusing on the comprehensive urban plan, which should have the role of directing local
development. The focus of this paper is the impact of the general urban plan on the
effectiveness and efficiency of spatial interventions (construction investments,
infrastructure projects, changes in land use etc.). Comprehensive urban plan formally
has the character of strategic and regulatory development framework. In the present
form, the comprehensive urban development plan aims at guiding and control of local
development through the determination of the spatial strategy and building control
parameters. However, despite the large scope of control and guidance of spatial
development in the comprehensive urban plan, there is often no connection of specific
interventions and strategic objectives, and there are numerous cases of abuse of the
planning documents, and the role of the comprehensive urban plan becomes blured.
Comprehensive urban plans, in the form in which they are applied do not
represent an adequate framework for local development, or do not correspond to the
interests and expectations at the local level. General opinion is that the plans are
inflexible, inefficient, ineffective, unrealistic ... in relation to requirements, or that they
constitute an inadequate instrument to guide local development in Serbia in the new
socio-economic conditions. The ineffectiveness and inefficiency of general urban plans
in the area of local development are due to the dual character that they have, or the
volume of direct and control physical development that are not based on the real
interests of local development and the changing interests.
A central research topic in the present paper deals with the problem of the
relationship of the comprehensive urban plan and the interests / expectations related to
local development in Serbia after the year 2000. Analysis of the interaction of strategic
and regulatory nature of the general urban plan and the interests of local development
has contributed to the understanding of how the role of comprehensive urban plans was
created, and reasons that influence the effectiveness and efficiency of spatial
interventions. The research is conducted within the process of local development, in
which the guidelines and rules of comprehensive urban plans are translated into real
interventions. The analysis has contributed to shedding light on the relationship of the
system of urban planning and management of local development, which imposes the
following questions:
- What is the role of urban planning in relation to the interests of local
development?; whether urban planning is justifiable at the local level, that is, whether
the measures taken in the framework of spatial development plans are directed towards
the interests of local communities and related contexts?;
- How complex, hierarchical, linear planning system works in relation to the
available support of institutions, the political will and interests at the local level?; how
are these structures established and how do certain procedures and forms of urban
planning and management of local development remain stable?
Neoinstitutional theory was chosen as the main theoretical framework because it
clarifies what causes he construction and dissolvement of institutions, and most
importantly - how they work. Through the neoinstitutional theory the relationships
between individual processes are analysed, as well as systems within the institution,
what are the components of the institution, rules or norms that condition their
relationships and the like. The collaborative planning model is considered as a
framework for analysis and planning of local development, but combined with the
rational model. Together, these two models form the role of the comprehensive urban
plan in Serbia.
The methodology is adapted to the purpose and research problem. The main
objective of the research is to understand the role of the general urban plan for local
development in Serbia and determine its adequacy in the current management system.
The main problem that is being investigated is the relationship of strategic and
regulatory nature of the general urban plan and the ineffectiveness and inefficiency of
spatial intervention in the management of local development in Serbia. In addition to the
methods of data analysis, document reviews, surveys and interviews, the case study
method was used as the most adequate. The role of the comprehensive urban plan is
formed under the influence of numerous factors within the institutional order, and case
study confirms the diversity of given variables. The case in stake is the use of the
comprehensive urban plan in the management of local development in Belgrade and at
the level of urban municipalities (Mladenovac). The city of Belgrade is a specific case
of administration, stipulated by a special law (Law on the Capital, 2014), which
formalizes the city municipality as an organizational part of the city, not as a unit of
local government. City Municipality has less competence and independence in
performing activities related to the management of local development in relation to local
governments, and the problems it faces are far stronger and are more complex and show
the extent to which the system can prevent development flows.
The research confirmed the thesis that master plans do not realize the role of
protecting the interests of local development in Serbia, but that it depends on
institutional factors in the individual case. Due to the shaken positions of planners after
the socialist period and during the transition period to democracy, during which
planning has kept its procedures and forms, planning becomes less important in
decision-making process of development, as well as its form and position of
actors/planners who are supposed to represent the interests of local development.
Overall comprehensive planning remains only a legal obligation, which is obviously not
recognized as a strategic document or instrument of local development, by the structure
of the government and stakeholders in local government. However, as a legal
obligation, the general urban plan is followed in cases where it is impossible to interpret
its provisions differently, regardless of whether the benefit of the public and / or private
interest, or completely without any benefit to any party or just for the mere compliance
procedures.
The contribution of research in theoretical terms the integration of theoretical
positions approaches neoinstitucionalizma economic and sociological approach and its
application in research institutions, local development and urban planning. In practical
terms, a significant contribution to research in the field of urban planning is critical to
consider the role of the general urban plan of local development in Serbia, which has
not been critically examined, nor were examined factors due to which the role has been
to date. In a study of local development and the role of urban planning, we examine the
institutional theory in the special case of post-socialist Serbia (where, due to the neglect
of the role of the general urban plan and those agents atomized and unable to act). From
the point of topics roles general urban plan for local development in Serbia, the
contribution of research is reflected in the relativism of the instrument that the legal
framework and its application inevitable in daily practice. Although master plans in
practice often reviewed and there is criticism of the professional public, until now the
role of the general urban plan has not been studied in regulation and there were no
changes that would cause a change of the role of the instrument.
The contribution of research in theoretical terms is the integration of theoretical
positions approaches of neoinstitutionalism of economic and sociological approach and
its application in researching institutions, local development and urban planning. In
practical terms, a significant contribution to research in the field of urban planning is its
critical analysis of the role of the comprehensive urban plan for local development in
Serbia, which has not been critically examined, nor were factors due to which the role
has remained as it is. In a study of local development and the role of urban planning, we
examine the institutional theory in the special case of post-socialist Serbia. From the
point of roles of comprehensive urban plan for local development in Serbia, the
contribution of research is reflected in the relativism of this instrument that is presentes
as a legal framework and its application inevitable in daily practice. Although master
plans are often reviewed in practice and there are multiple criticisms coming from
professionals, until now the role of the general urban plan has not been studied in
regulation and there were no changes that would cause a change of its role.