The issue of possible autonomy of architecture is raised in the context of researching the particularities of architectural competition practice. The subject of the research is the competition practice in Serbia, within the Yugoslav cultural space. The aim of the research is to examine and explain both scientifically and critically, the limitations and possibilities of the architectural discipline, practice, and work to act autonomously and critically in relation to the general cultural framework and economic and social context in which they arise. Another aim is to use the obtained scientific results to explain the position and role of the architectural competition practice in the process of building and manifesting a disciplinary autonomy of architecture. The research problem is explained in the first chapter, where possible manifestations of architectural autonomy in the field of competition practice are investigated. The mechanisms of the institution of architectural competition are presented and standard relations between key actors are examined, such as the form of communication, the role of competition drawings, architectural design as a medium, the establishment of a value premise, and other aspects. In order to explain the particularities of the competition practice in Serbia, along with its various stages and forms, the paper provides an insight into the development of the local architectural scene – education of architects, operations of professional associations, adoption of relevant laws and rulebooks. The paper also gives an overview of the most important competitions in the observed period. The second part of the paper shows case studies pertaining to several architectural competitions for three locations in Belgrade – Terazije Terrace, Republic Square, and Slavija Square, held between the 1920’s and 1990’s of the previous century. iii After the analysis of individual architectural solutions and a comparative analysis of a series of projects and concepts, together with the analysis of textual contents of the primary sources, the paper provides, conclusions are drawn in relation to the realities of individual competitions and general state of the architectural scene relative to the issue of the autonomy of architecture.