The uncertain conditionas and unpredictable dynamic changes are the biggest challenge for sustainable development of contemporary cities. One of the processes that have major contribution to these conditions is climate change, a process that strong evidence imply is caused by anthropogenic factors, primarily by the use of fossil fuels and emissions of greenhouse gases. Cities, which contain the majority of today’s world population are the places of the biggest causes of climate change, but also the places of its most pronounced effects. The main focus of this thesis is the resilience of cities, e.g. the ability of city to cope with unpredictable impacts such as climate change, while maintaining the fundamental properties of its own identity, structures and processes, as well as the sustainability of its development. They are observed in this study as a complex socio-ecological systems, which are in the state of dis- equilibrium, and characterized by uncertainty, self-organization and spatial extension in which systems operate based on the "top-down" principle. In the integral framework of the "ecology of city" the urban form, as a product of human activities of adaptation natural environment according to their needs, will be considered together with other physical components of the system, and social processes as a part of the overall biological activity. Based on the findings of the impacts that different urban patterns could have on the processes and performance of urban systems we will deal with their role and importance to the overall resilience of urban systems as well as a specific one that refers to climate change. Urban form, as a "product" of certain model of urban design, reflects specific values of certain socio- economic system, as well as its relationship to the environment. These models have very diverse and disparate relations between artificial and natural components of the system, giving a rather different picture and the characteristics of the built landscape. The main objective of the thesis is to determine the influence of a particular model of urban design (hence the resulting urban form) to the resilience of socio-ecological system. Based on morphological, environmental and social criteria, the main objective is to evaluate resilience of certain patterns of urban form to climate change, and then consider urban design approaches that could improve it.