The motivation for this study is to establish a relation between architecture and territory, by researching the transformation of landscape configuration as a product of processes that occur both within the concept of architecture and the concept of territory. The reason for this research was the need for simultaneous consideration, within architectural and urban design processes, of both the city and the object. The proposed doctoral dissertation studies the role of architectural and urban space production as elements of landscape configuration in the process of the city territory development. The dissertation examines this trough a closer look at the processes of transformation of Belgrade’s landscape configuration in the second half of the XX century. The aim of this research is to establish a new model for the future transformations of landscape configuration on the basis of past experience in accordance with contemporary tendencies of development. The research initially sets the theoretical background, postulates and the focus of considering the relations within the cognitive triad landscape, territory and architecture. In the context of the research, for the purpose of reviewing elements of landscape configuration and processes of city territory development, the role of the architectural gesture had special significance, both within the process of forming the city territory of and the transformation of the landscape configuration. Taking the continuity of changes within the pre-defined categories (landscape, territories and architecture) as a starting point, landscape is viewed more as a process than as a product, which makes coding of the elements of its structure (such as architecture) important for reading the layers of changes and development within already established territories. The processes of defining the landscape configuration were examined through different scenarios of operation described by theoretical concepts of physical and social space „productionž, which result in spatial manifestations of elements of landscape configuration within the process of the city territory development. These, as such, are cultural artifacts with clearly defined positions and influence within the structure. Architectural and urban functioning as spatial and programmatic gestures and the potential of „networks, borders, differencesž were studied within the operational categories of spatial situations in order to establish relations „from point to field,ž or „from an element to the whole (configuration)ž. The landscape configuration is viewed through the phenomenon of architectural topography and the totality of the elements of the constructed and the elements of the natural, with the aim of forming a productive system. Starting from the premise of looking at the landscape as a text, based on pre-defined processes (scenarios of operation) and products (spatial situations) with the methodological apparatus borrowed from the philosophical and linguistic discourses, such as concepts of (post)structuralism and de-territorialisation, but also heterotopia and „empty spacež (terrain vague), the objective was to establish guidelines for reading the spatial narratives of the city, or multiple layers of its development. In this way, the discourse for researching the previous, but also a starting point for future transformations of the landscape structure was defined. In order to map the transformation of the landscape configuration in the process of city territory development, possible techniques for their representation were analyzed (from topografical to digitized approach). Previously defined conceptual, spatial and methodological apparatus was utilized in the second part of the research for examining the transformation of the Belgrade’s landscape configuration during second half of the XX century. The research was conducted through three comparative levels: within theoretical domain (through examination of complementarity thoughts expressed at significant conferences and those visualized in the context of general urban plans); in the practical domain: by examining of the methods and results of constructing nature and building in nature; as well as the determination of the current situation of Belgrade’s landscape configuration and defining the actual field of (abandoned) visions and (not)achieved realizations. All previously described methods of research, whether in the field of theoretical or interpretive have their operationalization as the focal point by proposing new models of operation in order to establish the relationship between nature and the inherited structures in it, where the contemporary city is seen as a transformed and reconstructed landscape. The closing discussion examines the potential of possible models for future transformations of landscape configuration, that were examined through various intervetions that vary in their duration and spatial cover (paradigm, project and program).