This research studies the relations between the architectural expression, its symbolic meaning, functioning as a message transmitter between the observer and the creation, and specifies the influences of spatial-physical context on the development of the symbolic concept in the memorial architecture design, starting from the view that the architectural expression, as the unity between a form and its function, in a specific spatial-physical context, expresses the sense and meaning of a spatial solution and the architectural form as a whole. The research procedure starts from the symbolic theory, as a methodological frame for the interpretation of memorial architecture and the experience of it. The symbolism of architectural expression is analyzed based on the symbolic theory, through the interpretation of artistic expression which the very architectural design conveys as well as by establishing the specifications of the architectural - urban setting. This scientific work deals with the detailed analysis of the functional solution and form elements setting, which conveys the uniqueness of the architectural expression in memorial architecture. The subject of the analysis is discovering the meaning of symbolism of architectural expression in memorial architecture, on the examples of authorial practice, through the analysis of spatial solutions used and the way structural forms are combined, in order to understand the symbolic message (meaning) between the observer and the work, while the importance of the author’s approach is specially emphasized in the conceptual phase of the architecturally-urban design of memorial architecture, where the whole meaning of a particular work is condensed. The symbolism of architectural expression is established through chosen referential examples, i.e. particular memorial architecture designs, as the specific subjects of the research within the case studies. The architectural-urban interpretation of 8 a specific memorial architecture design is done by means of comparative analysis, and all that according to previously set theoretical aspects of the topic, which provides the understanding of the architectural design as a whole and of the symbolic meaning of the set architectural-urban solution, the symbolism of form and function, as well as the design concept of the memorial architecture work. This scientific work aims to recognize the role of symbolism of an architectural expression in memorial architecture as a mechanism which transmits the message about the meaning of a certain piece of work¹. This study aims to contribute to understanding of architectural expression symbolism, which is based on previously defined theoretical bases, and presented in two directions: as a way of understanding of the symbolic function of a work (through architectural analysis) and as a way of understanding and interpretation of symbolic forms in the works of memorial architecture.