This work researches the reasons for the deviations that negatively or positively affect the achievement of the highest possible acceptability of the space of the public squares by users and local communities. It concerns the deviations that projects of reconstruction of public city squares in Serbia are exposed to. The main reasons for these deviations are the risks that occur due to some specific characteristics of these objects, a large number of participants, the lack of information and other uncertain conditions during the implementation of the project. For the purpose of a systematic approach to risk management, the model for risk management has been defined and it describes in details the implementation of identification, exposure assessment, the eligibility and planning responses to the risks as well as the integration of risk management with other activities on the project. In the first part of the research the investigation of selected projects of reconstruction of the public squares has been conducted. The aim was to define the conditions in the realization of these projects and the Delphi method in order to identify risks with a positive or negative impact on the acceptability of the space of the public square. The second part describes a model for risk management in support of the investor in the decision-making process, which is an integral part of the initial risk register. Model for risk management enables the investor at the very initial stages of the project, to be able to adequately identify, analyze and control risks with an impact on the acceptability of space, which the projects of reconstruction of public city squares in Serbia are exposed to. The application of the model influences the decision-maker to systematically examine the effects on: accessibility, flexibility, the versatility, recognizability and comfort of the space and on the bases of those facts to plan strategy to reduce or eliminate threats and increasing opportunities during the project. The result of the research relates to the upgrading of knowledge in the field of urban design, reconstruction and transformation of public squares through the implementation of risk management methodologies. Practical application of research results is related to improve the existing practices and methodologies of investment projects in the state sector and to redefine the role of architects in the planning, design and construction of public squares in accordance with modern principles of management of investment projects.