The subject of the research thesis represents different types of sports facilities The subject of the research thesis represents different types of sports facilities built in Belgrade in the XIX and XX century. It starts with a description of the built in Belgrade in the XIX and XX century. It starts with a description of the first halls, followed by description of public baths, meadows turned into first halls, followed by description of public baths, meadows turned into playgrounds and sport fields, velodromes and ice skating rinks, football playgrounds and sport fields, velodromes and ice skating rinks, football stadiums, as well as Soko practice sites which represented the first system- stadiums, as well as Soko practice sites which represented the first system- built- sports facilities, ending with the modern sport centers and halls built- sports facilities, ending with the modern sport centers and halls reflecting the need to keep pace with the global architecture of sport facilities. reflecting the need to keep pace with the global architecture of sport facilities. The architecture of sports facilities in Belgrade began intensively to develop The architecture of sports facilities in Belgrade began intensively to develop in the mid XIX century. With the development and expansion of sport in the mid XIX century. With the development and expansion of sport activities and competitions it gained importance, which led to building the activities and competitions it gained importance, which led to building the first major playgrounds at the end of the XIX century. At the beginning of the first major playgrounds at the end of the XIX century. At the beginning of the XX century, the architecture of sport facilities kept up with the progress of XX century, the architecture of sport facilities kept up with the progress of mass competitions and expansion of Soko movement. Apart from satisfying mass competitions and expansion of Soko movement. Apart from satisfying functional requirements, the aesthetic appearance of the building, which had functional requirements, the aesthetic appearance of the building, which had undergone various transformations, was also taken into account. New undergone various transformations, was also taken into account. New concepts and forms were created in period between two World Wars, and with concepts and forms were created in period between two World Wars, and with them started the popularization of new, modern sports based on the western them started the popularization of new, modern sports based on the western metropoles, which was reflected in the architecture. After World War II, new metropoles, which was reflected in the architecture. After World War II, new architectural forms which fully answered the purposes required by sports architectural forms which fully answered the purposes required by sports facilities were developed. The sixties and seventies can be named the golden facilities were developed. The sixties and seventies can be named the golden age of sport architecture since the most significant buildings in Belgrade were age of sport architecture since the most significant buildings in Belgrade were constructed then. Towards the end of the XX century, the building of Belgrade constructed then. Towards the end of the XX century, the building of Belgrade „Arena“ began, the largest sport hall in the Balkans, which has met all „Arena“ began, the largest sport hall in the Balkans, which has met all international standards of large halls for international matches which were the international standards of large halls for international matches which were the preconditions circumstance for its construction. preconditions circumstance for its construction. Based on thorough study of primary sources, historiography, as well as Based on thorough study of primary sources, historiography, as well as discussions with architects who have designed or participated in the discussions with architects who have designed or participated in the construction of some sport facilities in Belgrade, the frameworks for construction of some sport facilities in Belgrade, the frameworks for periodization, typology and evaluation were set, from its inception at the periodization, typology and evaluation were set, from its inception at the beginning of the XIX century, until the end of the XX century. Thus, the beginning of the XIX century, until the end of the XX century. Thus, the importance of social, political and cultural circumstances in which the objects importance of social, political and cultural circumstances in which the objects were built, were emphasized, due to the huge impact that they had on the were built, were emphasized, due to the huge impact that they had on the selection of the builder, location of works, as well as the appearance of the selection of the builder, location of works, as well as the appearance of the building. Monitoring the changes in the development of architectural structure building. Monitoring the changes in the development of architectural structure was also an important method in analyzing the development of sport facilities was also an important method in analyzing the development of sport facilities including the building of consciousness for such need in that period. including the building of consciousness for such need in that period. Special attention was paid to the architectural designs and processes of Special attention was paid to the architectural designs and processes of changing functionality and aesthetics in accordance with the needs of the changing functionality and aesthetics in accordance with the needs of the exercise, which eventually grew intensively. In addition, in the context of the exercise, which eventually grew intensively. In addition, in the context of the goals of this study, we explored the role of the sports facilities in the cultural, goals of this study, we explored the role of the sports facilities in the cultural, social and sociological aspects, also the visual identity that achieves the effect social and sociological aspects, also the visual identity that achieves the effect of spectacle and raises the importance of the struggle. Emphasis is placed on of spectacle and raises the importance of the struggle. Emphasis is placed on the enormous impact that sport has on society at a given time, through various the enormous impact that sport has on society at a given time, through various forms of competitions and events. Also, the topic oф ideology was considered forms of competitions and events. Also, the topic oф ideology was considered through sport, mass participation and its influence. through sport, mass participation and its influence. At the very end, continuity of the development of sport facilities in Belgrade At the very end, continuity of the development of sport facilities in Belgrade since the mid XIX century up to now was pointed out, despite many obstacles since the mid XIX century up to now was pointed out, despite many obstacles resulting from wars and lack of funds. The necessity of valorization within the resulting from wars and lack of funds. The necessity of valorization within the architectural history of Belgrade is set as the theme for the future researchers architectural history of Belgrade is set as the theme for the future researchers and historians of architecture. and historians of architecture.