In this paper we examine an architectural model, as a system of regularity in spatial relations by which is formed an architectural structure, which serves to delimit the LGBTQ (Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Queer) places and separate them from, and at the same time to connect them with heteronormative environment in Belgrade. The research is primarily related to the last twenty years, since the beginning of normalization of queer space of Belgrade, with the appearance of the first places that are openly LGBTQ. Architectural division, which connects/disconnects these places with the environment, serves simultaneously to shape the queer space of the city as a whole as a space of division. Heteronormativity in this paper is seen as an order which oppressively maintains binary division among the inhabitants into two normal groups, straight men and straight women, each of which keeps its sex, gender, sexual orientation, practice and social role in an unambiguous interdependence, as opposed to the other group. On the other hand, the notion of queer is used to bring together all the identities which escape heteronormativity. Queer space is a space whose use is not always and at each of its places heteronormative. The opportunities for the creation of identity in this space are numerous and varied. Because of heteronormative oppression queer space is divided into areas of pressure and the areas of freedom. Queer bodies are those which in their practice cross the border which is produced in this way in the city, as opposed to the bodies that remain and survive in a heteronormative field only. The aim is to examine the role of architecture, both as a discipline and as built or symbolic spatial structure, in the creation of queer space at the beginning of the process of normalization of LGBTQ identities in Belgrade. Queer space of the city is formed by self-organization and it is completely ignored by local architectural discipline and its institutions. Therefore, this research should start from the spatial life and practices of X the population, rather than from institutional designing and planning documents and activities. The attention was primarily focused on the gay and lesbian practices, performances/representations and lives, because these groups are the most visible in liberation. The widest theoretical framework, which combines spatial practices of the body and lived spaces with the architecture, is found in Lefebvre’s spatial dialectics, according to which the production of social space is based on the triad of spatial practice as perceived, representations of space as conceived and spaces of representation as lived space. The new reading of Lefebvre dialectic of production space from the perspective of queer theory, offers the methodological framework which can relate spatial architectural models, which appear in the popular and professional discourse on and about queer people through the use of architectural metaphors of the closet, the room of one’s own, the four walls and the periphery, to the spatial and architectural models in the spatial practices and in the structure in and around the queer places in the material space of the city. The perceived queer space is examined as a spatial practice of structurally conditioned contacts of queer bodies and with queer bodies in the city, through restrictions in movement, sight and other sensory perceptions. First, the architecture is analyzed as an instrument of perception, following the concept of framing device by Beatriz Colomina (1992). Then we analyze the architecture as an instrument of orientation, following the phenomenological concept of orientation devices by Sara Ahmed (2006a). Based on the way the built structure serves to hide and disorient queer body in the city at the beginning of the normalization process, it is shown that the perceived queer space is generated by asymmetric division into heteronormative field and queer places, as a spatial practice which curves space around queer bodies and places, together with the lines of movement and perception, and also practice which makes it difficult to simultaneously determine the position and orientation of queer bodies in the architectural structure of the city. Afterwards, we analyze the representation of queer space that appears in the speech through the use of architectural metaphors of the closet, the room of one’s own, the four walls and the periphery. Complex meaning of these metaphors and its connection to the XI LGBTQ situation in space are analyzed based on two groups of linguistic theories. According to the group of comparison theories the similarity of spatial relations in metaphor and social relations of queers is the key to the transfer of meaning. According to the group of theories of interaction and speech act, it is the difference between these two relations that is the key. Based on these two approaches, we see how one and the same spatial structure can be used simultaneously for exclusion and inclusion of LGBTQ people in the society. The architectural structure that appears as an image in queer metaphors, and later architectural structure in the material space of the city in and around queer places, will be analyzed by spatial model based on the method used by Hillier and Hanson (1984). The models will be designed by abstracting architectural structures to the level of cells, based on restrictions in the movement and in relation to the way of connection between cells. The models formed in this way reveal that the body in queer metaphors is always located behind the outside/inside border. In addition, they show that it is possible to observe these metaphors in synergy, as each of them relates to one hierarchical level of architectural scale, and each includes and implicates the following one. It is therefore possible to overlay their spatial models, in order to create a synthesis model of queer space that emerges in the speech. The synthesis model indicates a queer place as the one that is separated from heteronormative public urban space by multiple outside/inside borders. Segregation of queer bodies is such that the body is simultaneously inside the center and in the periphery. That is why this model is labeled a model of inward peripherization. In the period considered in this paper dozens of various LGBTQ places appear and succeed one another in the city. In the analysis of lived queer space in Belgrade will be formed typology of queer places in relation to the criteria by which their architectonics participate in the shaping of perceived and represented queer space, and in relation to their use and role in the activities of the inhabitants. Based on this typology, the development of LGBTQ places in the last twenty years will be shown in time perspective, and according to their disposition in the city. The history of LGBTQ places will be supported with various written, archival and electronic sources, as well as with XII 24 semi-structured interviews with the organizers and visitors of the places, carried out between 2010 and 2016. In addition to the interviews, an anthropological method of direct observation and ethnography was used in the last twenty years in most of the described places. The same method of reducing the architectural structure to the model, method which was used to analyze the structure in metaphors, will be applied here too, in order to model LGBTQ places in the city. In this way it is possible mutual comparison of spatial models in functionally and architecturally very diverse locations. It is also possible to compare their models with the model of inward peripherization. It is concluded that the model of inward peripherization is persistently repeated in the structure of LGBTQ places, only with small deviations throughout this period. Repeating of the model of inward peripherization in the queer places can be interpreted in two ways. If we look at it as an application of representations of queer space designed in a speech, then we can conclude that this model consistently repeats social relations of integration through isolation and disclosure through closure, which is immanent to queer bodies. Nevertheless, by extending Judith Butler’s theory of performativity to spatial phenomena, we can observe how this citation and iteration of the inward peripherization, which moves from the speech to urban space, and continues on from place to place, produce LGBTQ identities. By the noted change in the architectural model of the inward peripherization in places of occasional parties, as well as in friendly places, gently sliding towards openness in the way of shaping of local LGBTQ identities can be recognized. All these conclusions describe the development of queer space in Belgrade as a self- organized practice. Bearing this in mind, as well as taking into account the experiences of large cities in the West, where the normalization of queer space is much more advanced and partly institutionalized, further research and learning needs and opportunities in local circumstances is proposed, in order to begin planning and designing for LGBTQ communities within the local architectural discipline and thus to create a more liberal city, more appropriate to its inhabitants. XIII