Тhis study primarly researches the relationship between thought and creative models in the realm of architectural. Contemporary architectural context contains the diversity of cultural discourses, involving divergent ideas in the theory of architecture and the design epistemology. The decline of modernist movement led to a disappearance of the ambition to form a leading and prevailing architectural ideology, methodology or style. Consequently, the diversity of postmodern cultural discourses both allows and obliges the author to formulate a contemplative ground for his/hers creative actions. Thus the question of the relationship between thinking and creating in architecture, especially the possibility of thinking through architecture becomes all the more important. Since thinking process itself belongs to the realm of philosophy, studying the intersection of architecture and philosophy should encourage the transition from the thinking about architecture to thinking through architecture. Architectural interest in philosophy and philosophical interest in architecture, benefited both disciplines through history, and finally led to question the existence of the authentically architectural concept. This study therefore explores the possibility of the interchange of knowledge between architecture and philosophy. The possibility of the transference of the epistemology (or the thinking model) from philosophy to architecture has been explored in this study. This possibility is examined trough the transference of the principle of continuity, introduced by the philosopher Gilles Deleuze, into the theory of interior design. Assuming that new methodology models for interior design can be devised using basic philosophical principles developed in the second half of the last century, the study explores how the transfomed interior design theory will enable the emergence of new concepts of interior design models. In past few decades, under the influence of the theory of Gilles Deleuze, new design tools and techniques were developed. This in turn opens the question of the inner logic of what constitutes the architectural design methodology at the conceptual level. As a discourse that provides the living framework, architecture simultaneously deals with practical and philosophical issues. Therefore, embodiment of this framework always goes in conjunction with philosophical principles of the epoch. During the last century, the complex mechanism, by which prevailing philosophical attitudes embedded themselves into the architectural act, were revealed due to rapid development of the theory of architecture. Leading architectural paradigm shifts were often tested through the treatment of the interior space, either by establishing the individual/social relationship, interior object and space organization models, or interior/exterior relationship. In the interconnection of material and immaterial phenomena in architecture, the interior is often seen as addressing the issues of meaning, trough the direct contact of body and space as well as a place of intense cross-talk of philosophy, psychology and architecture. The theory of Gilles Deleuze affected the theory and practice of architecture in different ways in the last half of the century as it showed the inexhaustible possibilities to form the theoretical ground for an architectural act. As one of those possibilities, this study identifies the principle of continuity as a new thinking model which dissolves the dialectical logic employed in understanding of the world previous to the Deleuze in order to establish new models for architectural design. The thought model which retains only what augments the number of connections, and rejects everything else as rigid, is named the principle of continuity. Its coherence is then explored by an attempt to use it for the development of new methodology models for the interior design. This model works through finding of seeds which can be developed into something new and different, saving simultaneously the connection with the past and the existing, providing, in this way, always a new material for further development. Matter in Nature is in the state of flux, so material of non-human world and body of the living world are not isolated from one another but intertwined through a series of chemical, physical and biological transformations. This notion of interconnectedness, which encourages finding contacts of heterogeneous flows, can reveal the invisible connections which form creative potential of our world. If we adopt the Alan Badiou's observation that philosophy by itself is an affirmation of the possibility of something else, (the other), can we make architecture to do the same? To this end this study provides a contribution to a pursuit of methods that reveal the other and different in architecture, something that is not familiar or identical but alien. Moreover, this study includes an attempt to resonate a philosophical concept, as a key for discovering of architecture's own creative instincts and identity. Design methods, constituted by this resonance, activate the unknown as a creative mechanism which can find new connections which can drive further design paradigms shifts. As a main context for the development of those methods, the study sees openness that is provided by the philosophical platform of Gilles Deleuze, which represent the ground for formulation of three new possible interior design methods named: Destabilization, Weaving and Tagging.