Even though the question ‘what is a concept’ is still current, this work poses a more particular question: ‘what is an architectural concept?’ The corner stone of this text are philosophical theories, conceptions and fragmentary philosophical corpuses. In being given an architectural interpretation and application, this is the ground the present theses and findings could destabilize, prior to providing its architectural form. Thus, the text can be read from its end, that is, starting with its provisional conclusions, and returning towards a more complete understanding of its premises. This possibility of a double reading reveals an object that is never considered in the present; rather, by projecting into the future, it surpasses its own time. Researching the architectural concept, the very subject of this dissertation, provides a philosophical-aesthetic platform for an epistemology and methodology of architectural design. The intention is to present and elucidate the necessity and specificities of integrating current architectural theory and practice, with the aim of having the results of this research become a kind of introduction into the construction of a new architectural platform – architectural philosophy. Similarly, the new design methods, as the condition for the production of the new. The research lies within the (self-)designed space of analogy between architecture and philosophy, of which the most conspicuous point of overlap is the production of concepts. Projecting further steps, any production is conditioned on the design of concepts and their objectification, meaning that we can speak of production with concepts, by way of concepts and through concepts. Of necessity, this imposes the conclusion that in architecture it is always a matter creating something new. The fundamental hypothesis of this dissertation is that within the overall architectural creation, appearance and execution, the concept represents the first projected object of architecture, creating conceptions with which to materialize its own authenticity in another object – the phenomenal form of architecture. The starting premise is that the architectural concept is intuitively projected as an object of reality and object of illusion. The second premise is that the greatest value achieved with the architectural concept is the perfect dream that establishes harmony between the real and illusive. The third premise is that the architectural concept, upon materialization into a substantive object, returns to its author seeking a new life as a philosophical-aesthetic object. In this infinite temporal flow, the architectural concept is what produces the new and critically opens the question of follows in times ahead. A particular level of the text, integrated into its overall structure and content, comprises the terminological structure interspersed with the idea to define architectural terminology, as well as explain important philosophical concepts that determine both the philosophy and aesthetics of the architectural concept. In that sense, the work can be read as a new architectural linguistic concept.