The doctoral dissertation deals with the problem of brownfield sites transformation in the context of contemporary urban development and sustainable urban regeneration strategies. More precisely, it deals with the role and importance of preserving the identity and industrial heritage renewal for the purpose of contribution to the planning of urban regeneration. Adaptive reuse is distinguished as a sustainable model of regeneration of industrial brownfields, which implies the integration of abandoned industrial sites in the urban environment and their adaptation to new purposes within the new social and economic context. Although the importance of preserving the value of industrial heritage and achieving social and cultural goals in the process of adaptive reuse has been recognized, yet the primary goals of the regeneration program for industrial brownfields are distinguished as economic and ecologic. The result of this approach to brownfield regeneration policies is reflected in usually ignored historical, spatial and cultural values of these sites as active components of material culture and urban memory of the population which leads to the permanent destruction of cultural, natural and architectural heritage and urban identity thus creating the unsustainable regeneration models. The initial assumption of this research assumes that historical, social, cultural and spatial values of industrial heritage need to be considered in the planning approach of urban regeneration. The second assumption is that these values of brownfield sites represent their significant development potential therefore the preservation of identity and renewal of industrial heritage contribute the sustainable regeneration of brownfield sites and the improvement of urban identity. Thus, the basic research questions are: what is worth keeping and preserving in an abandoned and underused industrial complex in the context of urban regeneration, what is meant by its identity and unique character of the site and how to formulate models of transformation of abandoned industrial complexes with the goal of preservation and enhancement its identity and achieving positive regeneration effects? VII The research was carried out by combining several basic and specific methods applied in the field of architecture and urbanism, as well as in similar fields such as sociology and the environmental psychology or urban psychology. The general scientific method by which the research is structured is analytical-synthetic method. The basic methods applied in general within the entire research paper are: the method of logical argumentation –based on clear argumentation, rhetorical clarity and the creation of precisely explained and documented relations, the method of scientific analysis of the contents from primary and secondary sources and case study method. The Case study method is complex method comprised of other scientific methods. Survey and urbomorphological methods are selected as research methods within the scope of the case study. The survey was conducted through a questionnaire and the method of quantitative analysis of the content (the respondent’s answers) is selected as the basic method for data analysis. Urbomorphological method refers to the analysis of urban plans and photos, as well as to its own research of existing archival material on industrial objects and on site researches. The results of the first part of the research indicate the importance of achieving socio- cultural goals and the preservation of the identity and values of the industrial heritage in the process of regeneration of industrial brownfields. The second part of the research defines the scientific concept of the identity of industrial brownfields, as well as spatial, functional and cultural values of industrial brownfields which have an important role in guiding the process of regeneration. The outcome of the third part of the research is the analytical tool for researching the values of the industrial heritage in the form of the typological classification of brownfields which require different treatments of tangible and intangible remains of the industrial past in the process of regeneration. The basic goal of the typology is to define the contemporary relationship with the values of industrial heritage which is important for selection of planning approach to the brownfield regeneration. In the empirical part of the research, an example of the brownfield regeneration is presented and operationalization of the previously defined identity concept and brownfield typology aroused from the theoretical framework of the research. Finally, the research defined spatial patterns for transformation of the industrial brownfields in the urban regeneration process, applicable in a similar geographical, social and cultural context. The methodology of formulation the spatial VIII patterns was derived partly from the theoretical framework but also from the results of its application within the case study. This research represents a contribution to the discipline of urban regeneration, meaning the regeneration of industrial brownfields by formulating a scientifically based approach to transformation with the aim of preserving and improving the identity and adapting the brownfields for new purposes within the context of contemporary social and economic conditions of the city development. The scientific and theoretical contribution of the thesis is the definition of the scientific concept of the identity of industrial brownfields and their spatial, functional and cultural values. The scientific and methodological contribution of the thesis is reflected in the formulation of the analytical tool for defining the relationship with the values of industrial heritage which is important for the selection of planning approach to the regeneration of brownfield. The second group of results is practical and refers to the possibility of applying proposed recommendations in the planning of regeneration of industrial brownfield sites and enhancement of contemporary approach to the preservation of industrial heritage in the process of urban regeneration in Banjaluka and the wider region.