This dissertation focuses on the exploration of decision-making processes within the framework of contemporary planning process, i.e. on examining the possibilities for improving the relationships among the participants in urban planning process in order to reach the legitimate decision important for spatial development. As the nature of informing the participants about the problem to be discussed, the exchange of opinions among the participants, as well as the character of discussion itself genuinely affect the efficacy of contemporary planning process, the critical analysis of the principles of group deliberation essentially influence their adequate implementation in planning practice. The analysis of the contemporary trends for developing the decision-making process in the urban planning practice of Western European countires shows an effort made to reach a consensus-based agreement, underpinned by communicative rationality, equality and reflection of all those who can be in a way affected by the result of the urban planning decision-making process. In broader terms, the research aims at examining the possibilities for improving the contemporary planning approach in Serbia by considering the aspects and principles of group deliberation. In narrow sense, the research critically assesses the decision-making procedures during alientation of public property, on the example of military brownfields. The research aim derives from the hypothesis that the process of planning the reuse of military brownfields in Serbia contains the elements of group deliberation important for improving the course of action and decision-making within the formal planning process. The origin of such a hypothesis is based on deliberation, i.e. the potential for overcoming the classic democratic voting procedures by reaching an agreement on an issue that would be acceptable for all participants in a decision-making process. Although a deliberation in planning process is most commonly seen in the form of group deliberation, the underlying idea is to improve communication between different actors by informing them about a local problem before a decision-making procedure begins. Therefore, the process of (group) deliberation and its normative requests for reaching a legitimate decision VI acceptable for all (the so-called deliberative consensus) appears as a conceptual/theoretical research framework and an instrument appropriate for this research subject. The theoretical research part particularly focuses on examining the possibilities for achieving rationality during the decision-making process, through the lens of theory of deliberative democracy and contemporary communicative-collaborative planning paradigm, as well. The transformation of planning process towards including the deliberative principles has been postponed in postsocialist and/or postcommunist social context due to institutional rigidity, the lack of public trust in the initiators of spatial development and the absence of the mediation procedures in planning process. Although the Serbian (Yugoslav) social context in the second half of the 20th century was based on the self- government, and, therefore, not that strong autocracy as experienced in other Eastern Bloc countries, the changes such as the dissolution of the federal state, turbulent shift of political regimes, and thus the entire legislative system, affected all the spheres of public life – the organisation of planning process and the form of spatially relevant decision- making were degraded, too. Current, democratic transitional context in Serbia still lacks clear vision how to develop planning process, and, thus, the strictly defined methodology of decision-making in spatial and urban planning, as well. Keeping previous in mind, group deliberation, and deliberation in general, is considered a flexible instrument for spatial governance in Serbia. The reason behind such a thesis is found in the conceptual similarity between deliberation and the contemporary communicative-collaborative planning paradigm based on consensus, equality, and involvement of different participants in the decision-making process. Moreover, the focus of group deliberation on achieving the four principles – freedom, comprehension, equality and rationally motivated consensus – and introducing the so-called neutral moderator makes the decision-making process adaptable to various planning systems. Therefore, in addition to the theoretical contribution, the research also aims at elucidating the contemporary planning framework in Serbia, by the overview of planning policies since the Second World War until nowadays, through the lens of the decision-making approach. The utmost outcome of this dissertation relates to defining the possible guidelines for the transformation of urban planning approach in Serbia.