This paper is a contribution to the study of the planning activities and
transformation of the Belgrade urban waterfront landscape. The study starts from the
analysis of initial ideas and concepts of the development of the Belgrade waterfront parts.
The chronological analysis and the study indicate a gradual emergence of very different
urban structures that have developed over time, as well as the specific natural conditions of
an indented acquatorium at the mouth of two rivers, the Sava and the Danube. The heritage
and the natural position of the city which was built, and has developed, on the Belgrade
ridge have conditioned the long and exciting history of the area of a specific urban
landscape. The political circumstances and changes in the social and economic conditions
coupled with numerous wars made the urban landscape transformation dynamic. We will
trace the attitude of the settlement towards the water through the study of the genesis of
planning, actually from the first known planning activities, the Plan for the Town within the
Moat drawn up by Emilijana Josimović in 1867. The analysis of the first ideas about
developing a new part of the city on the other bank of the Sava river found its foothold in
the international competition conducted in 1922 aimed at preparing the Master Plan. The
new political circumstances after the Second World War contributed to the rapid
construction and development of a new part of the city on the left bank of the Sava river
when great urban landscape transformations from the natural to urban landscape took place.
New town planning theories have introduced modern architecture in the Belgrade
waterfront. With socio-political and economic changes, the nineteen-eighties determined
different ownership relations, which reflected in the space planning and architecture. The
attention is dedicated to the studies of the Sava Amphitheatre as a Belgrade waterfront
resource. The 21st-century neo-liberal economies have not achieved a significant shift in
the concept of space planning. This study opens a question of how we can affirm the issue
of the Belgrade waterfront taking into account the inherited different concepts of the two
river banks.