The interaction of negative social and economic factors at the global level, in the late twentieth and early twenty-first century, resulted in the polarisation of spatial development that produced the global cities which managed to integrate into the global network, but also led to an increase in disparities between cities and the emergence of global phenomenon of shrinking cities. Research shows that the phenomenon of urban stagnation is increasingly widespread in Central and Eastern Europe, the United States, developed countries in Asia, North America and Australia. Data on the state of European cities show that many of them have entered the shrinkage process in the 1960s and that the phenomenon of stagnation in the period of the 1990s was more pronounced than the phenomenon of growth and development of cities. Conducted research on the territory of the northwestern region of the Republic of Srpska, where 15 out of 17 studied cities in the region are faced with the problem of urban shrinkage, show that this problem does not affect only Europe and the developed countries. This confirms the assumption that even in the Republic of Srpska urban stagnation is a more dominant process than the process of urban growth and development. Contribution to research in this area is reflected in the definition of a model for identification, mapping and typological classification of shrinking cities. Recognising the vulnerability of cities affected by the processes of stagnation and unwillingness of the current practice of planning and management in the Republic of Srpska to respond to the challenges they face, the thesis develops a new methodological approach, which aims to define more efficient and operational system of planning and management of cities in stagnation. The concept of adaptive management, predominantly developed in the field of ecology and natural resources management, was a starting point for researching and defining the methodology of integral adaptive management. On the other hand the elaboration of a new planning concept was established through the study of different modalities of planning in the Republic of Srpska, focusing on the analysis: of the approach and planning process, their attitude to the problem of urban stagnation, the scope of participation, models of negotiation and decision-making, as well as the attitude of planning towards learning. The study included an analysis of analogy between existing planning models in the RS and the concept of adaptive management, which resulted in the confirmation of hypotheses about the efficiency of the adaptive model. Also, the conclusion of the case study is that informal planning model achieves a significantly higher level of adaptivness with respect to the formal model and shows a much higher level of management efficiency in the implementation process. However, in both models were identified deviations from the adaptive approach and a series of weaknesses and shortcomings were addressed through the definition of guidelines for the improvement of the existing planning systems in the Republic of Srpska. Eventually, the key contribution of the doctoral thesis arises from the past results and is reflected in the upgrade and development of the planning theory and the theory of resilience through the integration of their key concepts and ideas.