The subject of the research is the energy performance of traditional rammed earth house in Vojvodina. Under the concept of a traditional house in Vojvodina, for the purposes of the conducted research, a unique architectural phenomenon is accepted: the tree-part rammed earth house that has been created and developed in the period from the end of XVIII, during the XIX and in the early XX century in the entire province of Vojvodina. The problem of the conducted research is the scientific analysis and explanation of the energy performance of the traditional single family houses in Vojvodina. Conducted research tends to exam and explain the energy performances of the house, consequently the potencial of the houses in contemporary context of sustainable development in Republic of Serbia. The topic of this research represents the new aspect of analyses of a traditional houses in Vojvodina, which was not, up to now, the subject of the scientific research in Serbia. Scientific testing and analysis of the energy performance of the basic three-part type of house in Vojvodina were carried out in three segments: 1) analysis of architectural and construction characteristics of the house and the thermal characteristics of the thermal envelope, 2.) measurements in situ and 3.) calculations of the house energy performance. Analysis of architectural and construction characteristics of the house included the following analysis: urban parameters (location, grounds, location of the building), object orientation, functional building concept, shape and compactness of the building, thermal zoning, buildings, natural ventilation. Analysis of the thermal performance of the building envelope included: the heat transfer coefficient U, the thermal resistance R and thermal conductivity λ for individual elements of the thermal envelope of the house. The in situ measurements were conducted on the five rammed earth walls on traditional houses in Vojvodina in heating season 2014⁄2015 for a total period of 80 days. The following parameters were monitored: air temperature, surface wall temperature and heat flux, in real time. Based on the measured parameters, the average was determined for the heat transfer coefficient U [W/(m2xK)], the thermal resistance R [m2xK/W] thermal conductivity λ gk m [W/(mxK)] for the rammed earth walls on traditional house in Vojvodina. The comparison of the results measured in situ and results calculated in accordance with the Regulations on energy efficiency in buildings was performed for U, R λ . The results showed significant gk, m differences. Calculations of energy performance of the house was carried out using the selected software KnaufTerm PRO. The calculation was performed for the basic three-part type house in Vojvodina. In addition, the calculation in which the values defined in the applicable Regulations on energy efficiency in buildings were replaced with the measured parameters (for the heat transfer coefficient U and thermal conductivity λ for the rammed earth wall). m The comparison between the values obtained by the calculation, and the results determined by in situ measurements show significant differences. The calculation of energy performance of the building based on the annual energy consumption for heating per unit area shown that the three-part house in Vojvodina is classified as G energy grade. The calculation of energy performance of the building, which uses the in situ measured values instead the ones from the Regulations shown that in that case the house can be classified as F energy grade, which is one grade difference. Those results of the calculations indicates inadequate treatment of traditional building materials and the evident shortcomings in the current Regulations on energy efficiency in buildings of Republic of Serbia. The research has shown that individual elements of the building envelope of traditional house in Vojvodina and the rammed earth house as a building do not meet the modern standards of energy efficiency defined by the Regulations of Energy Efficiency of buildings in Republic of Serbia. For that reason the conducted research also discussed measures to improve the energy performance and possibilities of functional transformation of the house.