The concept of transparency is highly exploited in contemporary office architecture, in order to express the character of company as powerful, but very accessible to clients. Highly glazed facades are used to express the openness and business honesty. High technology glazed facade is also associated with an image of modern organisation behind transparent walls, which is also responsible to the environment and energy preservation. Energy preservation responsibility becomes quite questionable if glazed facade ratio is not optimised according to building site and climate conditions. This research is exploring the utilisation of glazed facades benefits in office spaces in Belgrade climate. Such benefits are daylight utilisation (in order to reduce energy use for lighting) and utilisation of solar heat gains that compensate the large transmission heat loses during heating period. The primary aspect of this research is visual comfort in office spaces under daylight conditions, integrated with its energy implications. The research of daylight performance in office spaces using computer simulation is vary actual subject, as the technology and methodology of simulation process, as well as climate based daylight metrics, have been rapidly developed only during past decade. DIVA for Rhino was used as a simulation tool for daylight and energy performances of office spaces. The program was developed at Harvard University and presented in 2010. The advantage of DIVA program is that it has an integrated approach to daylight and energy simulations. An individual office space was analysed with net glazed ratio (WWR) of 50%, 60%, 70% and maximum possible 85%. The space was rotated to face four major orientations (east, south, west and north). Four groups of glass characteristics were selected, which correspond to 50%, 60%, 70% and 80% glass light transmittance. First part of analysis was focused on simulation of daylight and energy performances in office spaces without any shading. The goal of first simulation process was to explore only daylighting and energy use potentials in office spaces, as visual and thermal comfort conditions cannot be fulfilled in spaces without shading devices. The main subject of this research are office spaces with integrated shading devices, which are flexible to changeable climate conditions and, as such, can create comfortable working environment. The results of the analysis show that, in Belgrade climate, highly glazed facades can be used in south and north orientated office spaces. North orientated spaces have highest utilisation of daylight and consequently the lowest lighting energy use. The best optimum solution for utilisation of daylight is glass variant with high light and energy transmission characteristics combined with extremely good isolation properties. During heating period, spaces facing north are not receiving any solar gains, so high energy transmittance and isolation prosperities control the extremely high heating energy needs. At the same time, as the space is not exposed to direct solar radiation, the shading is open most time of the year, which results high utilisation of diffuse daylight. South facing spaces have high lighting energy needs. High utilisation of daylight is blocked by presence of direct radiation on facade during most time of the year, so shading is mostly closed. The same as for other orientations, lighting energy savings are raising as glazing ratio is rising, but the savings are relatively low, comparing to other energy needs. The highest daylight utilisation is occurring with low light transmission glass (low as 50%), because glass is reducing illuminance levels on working plane, so the shading stays open more often. But the primary reason for highly glazed south facade energy efficiency is high level of solar gains during heating period. Solar gains on south facade are cutting energy use for heating at a level that is almost twice lower, compared to other orientations of space, and about 30% lower overall energy.