The theme of the doctoral dissertation is a research of the model of the integration of the historical centre and the river coastal area in post - industrial cities, which belongs to the area of urban planning. The historical centre as one of the key components of urban space is the "body" that transforms and adapts to changes in growth. At the end, it contributes to the urbanization and quality of living conditions in the city. The research has determined the principles of the formation of the historical centre and the urban area of the river coastal area. Morphological point of view has been established on the directed growth of the existing historical centre with the aim to integrate the planned urban area of the river coastal area into the urban unit. In order to understand the research problem, specific locations of selected cities (Belgrade - Republic of Serbia, Zagreb and Osijek - Republic of Croatia) have been illustrated, together with an idea of their reconstruction. As the city complexity increases, depending on its size, the amount of unplanned, spontaneous and partially directed development of the historical centre is growing. The main task of the research was to bring the parts of the river coastal area in connection with the historical centre as a new integrated quality form of utilization and use of the surface. After checking the validity of the hypothesis, the three examples of cities have proved that the historical centre and the river coastal area are the most important constituents of the city and river, and their integrity points out the value of the city. The integration of the historical centre and the river coastal area can be realized by planning a directed growth of the historical centre, with respect to the context and identity of the city. Planning of spatial integration is possible within the "gravitational field" between the developmental poles. At that point, different intensity of mutual attraction of the historical centre and the river coastal area (Osijek - intensive, Belgrade - medium intensive, Zagreb - low intensive) has been determined. Based on the thesis, the scenarios for measuring the integration of the historical centre and the river coastal area are presented in the further urban planning. A realistic scenario can be accomplished in Belgrade by articulating a directed growth of a historical centre with variations (Danube and Sava) of the river coastal arrangements and their integration into a spatially physical frame. The pessimistic scenario of integrating the historical centre and the river coastal area should be changed in Zagreb by removing the conceptual gap between the plans of the "central axis" and the realization of the river coastal management in order to reduce their separation. The optimistic scenario of the integration of the historical centre and the river coastal area in Osijek relies on the complexity and originality of their interrelationship and expression. There is a possible transposition of the historical centre into the new urban area on the left bank of the river. The fact that one city has emerged under certain influence and interaction is an invariable category for urban planning. The artefacts of the historical centre and the river costal area, as well as their past, cannot be reconsidered. The dissertation is partly composed of the history of urbanism of Belgrade, Zagreb and Osijek from the period when they belonged to a common state.