The dissertation discusses the use of open public city spaces and the parameters affecting the decisions on movement and navigation through those spaces. The patterns of using public spaces, in this case pedestrian corridors, are observed in the framework of the space syntax theory defining the space configurationally, that is observing the space through relations, rather than distances. This observation of space is closely connected to the cognitive perception of the user and formation of cognitive maps. Space configuration, with extreme preciseness, creates or eliminates “lifež in a public space in terms of defining the areas of potential meetings. These relations are systematic and represent a product of architectural and urban design. However, apart from these global configuration parameters, i.e. the relations between pedestrian segments in the network, there are also local parameters concerning the perception of space in specific points when the decision on further movement direction is brought. So far, these parameters were observed in two dimensions, and this dissertation intends to determine the effect of three-dimensional space to bringing the abovementioned decisions, by using specific navigation assignments. The research starting assumption implies that the movement analysis of pedestrians through urban environments from the aspect of geometry and cognition may identify physical potentials for the activation of open public spaces, and that the use of parametric modelling tools in space syntax techniques enables defining specific interventions in public city spaces. The research will be implemented by combining basic and specific scientific methods and techniques applied in the fields of architecture, urbanism and social studies, including scientific analysis method, case study method, questionnaire method and statistical methods. Results of the first part of the research define the relevancy of the use of the parametric space analysis, offering a tool that represents an upgrade of the existing techniques and includes flexibility in the introduction of new parameters in further analysis. Results of the second part of the research that was conducted in the form of a questionnaire pointed out the fact that the navigation movement of users that are moving in a familiar space is a combination of effects of various parameters, the most dominant one being the subjective feeling of the respondent for the shortest route, which is in close connection with the smallest angle deviation from the diagonal direction from the given point to the destination. This tells about the formation of users’ cognitive maps which is not based on the previously all-defined route, but on bringing decisions on change of direction for certain characteristic route points individually. This is particularly visible in cases when there is no densely built structure of the surrounding facilities in these points, i.e. when the space does not žleadž the user to a clear continuation of his movement. This research aims to contribute to strengthening the role of pedestrian movement network in activation of public spaces in urban environments. By understanding the user’s perception on space, which is primarily configurative and global, during urban planning it is necessary to pay attention to space elements and their position in the complete movement system. At the local level, the role of space layout and elements in the environment is not inconsiderable as the potential of the meeting location in the total concentration of population’s movement, and therefore, the text of this dissertation represents a contribution to scientific and expert re-examination of parameters in urban design.