A process of reconstruction of Užice was carried out in a very complex and dynamic social, economic and political context, as well as in alike professional and artistic context. Research of political and professional historical background of this period points to a change in society after the year 1950, when the proletarian dictatorship concept was transferred into a concept of social equality and justice. This influenced the concept of manifestation square in the city centre to be supplemented with the concept of social centre; the programme included erection of social, cultural, commercial, business and entertaining contents. Reconstruction of Titovo Užice has got a particular significance as during the period from September 24 – November 29, 1941 (for 73 days) the city was the centre of ‘The Užice Republic’, ‘the fist liberated territory in occupied Europe.’ Political background led to the successful realization of the city square that consolidated both memorial and everyday’s purposes. In 1952, a competition was called for the best design of the Square and of the central city blocks. Two concepts for the city centre reconstruction clashed at the competition. One of the awarded works proposed a more compact urbanism on solid grounds in terms of regulation: boundaries among the blocks and open areas were distinctive and clearly indicated. Another awarded work insisted on avant-garde and open space. For this reason, the two works were both awarded the first prize. In the end, the Square was realized on the basis of a great deal of compromise though it met the program requirements given through theoretical assumptions about a new social centre. Designing works for building the Square commenced in the year 1949 ( the building of the County Board in Titovo Užice) but erection works started in the year 1957 ( building & housing block in Marshal Tito Street ). Central area of the Square with a Marshal Tito monument was finished in the year 1961. The Square was afterwards additionally built up to the year 2001. The period of production of documentation for the Square and the erection of the Square lasted for 52 years. Nowadays, the Square is still functioning as the central public space, but its sense should have been much wider. The Square as an urban-architectural unit should have been the regulator of both spatial composition and functions of the city and its entire plastics. This was shown in the General Urban Regulation Plan for Titovo Uzice. This goal was de-structured with the changes made in traffic designs, but it was also due to lack of implementation of building activities according to adopted vertical urban regulations, density and planned building activities in the downtown. Due to this, the crucial sense for realization of the Partisan Square was lost.