The basic aim of this work is how to recognize the principles of architectural tradition and to analyze whether and how these principles of national folk building could be implemented within the modern process of design. The analysis of examples, chosen from the inexhaustible treasury of traditional folkways building creativity on the territory of the present Republic of Serbia (and the Balkan Peninsula in a larger sense), according to established criteria, has led to the understanding and elaboration of the basic principles of architectural tradition. They show how people have built and constructed in conformity with climatic conditions, soil characteristics, flora and according to their needs, their spiritual and cultural tradition. The universal characteristics, principles and models that are applicable even outside the primary context in which they had appeared have been defined in this work. The secondary aim of research has been to observe the possibilities of implementing the recognized principles of architectural tradition today in the modern practice of urban planning and architectural design of group and individual buildings. The final part of the work is devoted to the analysis of actual possibilities of implementation of traditional building practice in the practice of architects today. The basic method applied here is the analytical one. However, in relation to the analyzed individual examples of traditional (ancestral) architecture it has acquired certain descriptive, structural, historiographic, comparative and intuitive elements. The use of these methods resulted in obtaining data not only on the folkways type of building, but of spiritual creativity, rites, religion and tradition, inherited customs and unwritten rules on building houses and other structures around them too. The analysis of structures of groups and individual buildings, by connecting the builders response to existential needs of the population under the influence of cultural and spiritual layers and influences, has led to crystallization of principles based upon known notions and VIII relations, now understood in a different, but complementary way, compared to the explanation given by ethnology and the protection of folkways building practice. Field studies in which the author was able to establish direct contact with building structures that had been largely identified in literature and with a smaller number of buildings identified by the author during his own field investigation, have been particularly useful. The most visible part of the research results are the 57 principles of architectural tradition from the territory of the present Republic of Serbia, and its direct vicinity. Every one of these principles is illustrated by corresponding graphic examples or photographs. These principles are the proof of the first hypothesis of the work, namely that nearly every work of a local builder had completely “grownž into the environment and represents the answer of man to the concrete climate of a given area. The inexhaustible treasury of building forms of folkways building tradition is a source of new cognizance, although partly unknown and shall be insufficiently present for new generations of researchers as it slowly fades away both in the field and in the consciousness of people. Acquaintance with the architectural tradition provides the possibility of modern implementation of these principles in today’s practice of architectural design. Principles of architectural tradition could be applied in modern design procedures too, as, according to ideas of sustainable development, it is indispensable to reassess both the starting points and the goals of the modern design procedure, both in practice and in the education of future architects. The educational system and modern communication should provide the possibility to develop awareness on architectural identity and architectural tradition as a component part of an unavoidable and unrenewable cultural resource. Тhe aim of this paper is to encourage the systematic, permanent and organized study and the contemporary use of the principles of the architectural tradition. Such a task would best be achieved within a certain existing or future newly established institution. This work would also have a socially engaged role, and the study of the architectural tradition and its possible contemporary implementation would have the character of a permanent Movement that would engage various types of researchers from all parts of the country, from pupils and students to scientific authorities, on the same principles IX (but with the contemporary funds), as well as "Cvijićeva škola", which has produced the famous edition of "Settlements and Origin of the Population" of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts. The research shows that at least one third of the total number of processed principles of architectural tradition is directly implemented within the contemporary process of design.The implementation of these principles in contemporary design and construction would have a positive impact on the overall quality of the built environment in Serbia.