The dissertation analyses the impact of shopping centres on the quality of urban environment. It has been observed that consumption in contemporary conditions influences the urban design of the city. That makes the role of trading space important for the quality of the immediate urban environment. This thesis analyses the shopping centre as a representative of modern trading spaces, which becomes one of the drivers of urban change and development. Compression and intensification of the functions of the public space with all necessary amenities under one roof leads to the transformation of the existing built structure of the urban area where the shopping centre is located. The assumption is that the location and design of the shopping centre affects the urban development, quality and intensity of space usage and leads to improvement or in some cases even degradation of the urban space. The impact of shopping centre on the urban environment is specified not only on the individual elements of their location and physical and functional characteristics, but also on the degree of integration into the urban area. The research has identified the undeniable impact of these facilities on the quality of the urban environment. The purpose of this research is to increase the comprehension of the impact of the shopping centre in the urban development and quality of the urban environment. A comprehensive analysis of shopping malls was conducted in this research to form elements for evaluating the impact of shopping malls on the physical and functional structure of an urban area in Belgrade, with reference to the social and symbolic values of those spaces. The goal of forming an evaluation model is to determine what kind of shopping mall, in terms of functional and physical structure, has a positive impact on a certain location. Recommendations for spatio-physical design and physical and functional integration into the urban environment have been formed through the evaluation model.