The doctoral dissertation treats issues of implementation of cultural and creative policies, and possibilities for such policies to be the base of urban regeneration of small municipalities. Urban-economic development policies of towns and settlements based on culture and creativity have become widely accepted, but they are frequently uncritically implemented. These policies may be recognized in concepts of cultural, creative city, cultural and creative industries, cultural and creative clusters, and cultural and creative tourism. They are usually connected to larger towns, but also increasingly occur in development of smaller towns and settlements; as smaller towns and settlements do not have usual cultural and creative policy resources, researches point to the fact that in such cases eligible models are based on development of tourism, based on local features, and a specific, “nichež offer. The starting assumption is that cultural and creative policies, based on the concept of clusters, may be the base of urban regeneration of smaller settlements. This is especially important in the context of Serbia, demographic and economic issues of small settlements and deliberation of implementation of such policies in urban regeneration. The second assumption is that methods and models of cultural and creative policies may be connected to spatial, cultural, and social characteristics, as well as characteristics of human resources, and that based on these it is possible to define the policy which corresponds to local conditions. In this context, the municipality of Golubac was selected as a representative example, due to the characteristics of the municipality and the projects which have been or are being implemented in it. The research was conducted by application of several scientific methods, applied in the area of town planning. The general scientific method employed was analytical- synthetic, with critical content analysis, logical arguments, deductive method, and case study method. The first part of the research comprises an overview of theoretical analyses of cultural and creative policies, from their emergence, definitions, application of terms, the accompanying phenomenon of town development and related concepts; it comprises positive and negative results of their implementation; various examples from practice; iv theories and scientific discussions, which altogether point to their complexity and the need for a different approach. Based on the research of the theoretical base conducted, classification of methods and models of cultural and creative policies was defined with the aim to serve as a base for further analytical apparatus of this research. The second part of the research provides comparative properties of cultural and creative policies, cultural and creative clusters, tourism, and urban regeneration. “Characteristicsž of cultural and creative policies, the set of properties which may be used to make a comprehensive description of policies, were separated and defined as an important part of the analytical apparatus, while criteria were set for further analysis. This part of the research provides a basic overview of the planning system in Serbia, as a base for understanding of further research. In the third part of the research, defining of models of urban regeneration by creative and cultural policies, the set criteria were applied in concrete terms. The model is to present a pattern of recognition of presence of urban regeneration in cultural and creative policies, and to yield results depending on the object of observation. Steps which need to be taken in the process of model formation were defined as well as the “zerož model, which is a descriptive, systematized account of the “intersection of two setsž: policies, aimed at use of culture, and creativity and urban regeneration. The fourth part of the research provides reasons for selection of the case study, basic characteristics of the municipality of Golubac, and projects of cultural and creative policies which have been implemented or are implemented. An analysis of resources of the municipality follows, as well as convenience of implementation of cultural and creative policies based on their previously determined typological classification, which served as a base for proving of the other hypothesis – that methods and models of cultural and creative policies may be related to local characteristics. Through implementation of the defined procedure within which an analysis of strategic documents, characteristics, and projects in of the municipality was conducted, while the urban regeneration model was defined and described using a case study, which also proved the first hypothesis. v Results of this research contribute to the discipline of cultural and creative policies in the function of urban-economic development. More specifically, the research is a contribution to the integrated and systematized approach and the manner of observation of urban development policies based on culture and creativity, especially their contribution to urban regeneration and development of smaller municipalities. The research emphasizes the complexity of cultural and creative policies and the necessary analytical approach in their preparation and implementation. Practical contribution comprises criteria and models which are applicable in preparation and implementation of different documents and projects, and which facilitate establishment of relations between cultural and creative policies, urban regeneration, and local specificities.