The topic of the doctoral dissertation is the establishment of a corelation between social and shaping factors and the architecure of public buildings of Pristina within the period between 1945 to 1990. The scientific approach in the research is oriented towards defining different social and shaping factors that directly or indirectly influenced the design of public buildings of Pristina during this period. Trying to understand the architectural spirit of an epoch, we must previously understand the social spirit of the same. For the purpose of this objective, the research is oriented towards understanding social relations, their development and characteristics, in order to establish and scientifically confirm their influence in the architecture of public buildings of Prishtina in this determined period. This approach implies a critical analysis of social circumstances, in order to determine how and to what extent these circumstances have had an impact on the architecture of public buildings in post-war Pristina (WWII). Landmark buildings which shaped the city's image of Pristina during this period were valorized, systematized and compared to objects of the same purpose from the same period in other cities of former Yugoslavia and wider. Application of several scientific methods in relation to the needs of certain phases, according with certain specific goals, determined the influence of post-war socialist social organization and ideology on the architecture of public buildings in Pristina between 1945 and 1990. Cultural and architectural heritage has been subject of valorization and it is confirmed its influence to the architecture of socialist city. Particular social factors has been identified which directly influenced the formulation of public buildings and based on that, it has been done the classification of buildings which appearing as direct or indirect influence of the particular factor. A methodological approach has been formulated that can be used to explore objects of other purposes in Pristina in the same time period. Modernity propagated by the new social order on the ideal way of life that should be manifested by the citizens of the "new nation", where architecture has a significant influence, was in direct conflict with the traditional principles of life of the majority of the inhabitants who lived in the then Prishtina, without distinction ethnic and religious affiliation. That was an important reason for refusing modernism. Because if we accept the city as a stage where the everyday life of every citizen develops, then at the beginning of his modernization, even his inhabitants who accepted the modern principles of life as "ideal" behaved quite similarly to the family Apel with Jacques Tati's film "My Uncle" (Mon Oncle) from 1958. The architecture developed within the time period covered by this dissertation, which we do not at all pretend to complete this research as a whole, but turning attention to one of the total undiscovered essential architectural epoch of Pristina, obliges us to take this topic seriously, scientifically, and without any prejudices, as it is, in relation to time, ideology, culture and, above all, human experiences this architecture. To someone this architecture is stranger, someone are deeply affiliated with it, and to some others is still insufficiently clear, but no one leaves indifferent. It’s here, among people and still today represents the core and spirit of the city.