Wooden structures’ quality assessment is, basically, testing their static strength and stability. This kind of assessment, by its nature, requires in situ testing, and due to specific technical characteristics of mechanical testing, it is primarily based on using uninvasive methodological approaches. High standards set to test architectural objects of cultural and historical significance, which, above all, refer to preserving their integrity and authenticity, directed this research towards establishing a reliable uninvasive method which will be used for that purpose. Establishing such a method required its calibrating since there had not been a direct equalisation of mechanically and uninvasively set parameters for the hardness of inbuilt wood. Ultrasound and stress waves commonly used in uninvasive assessment of mechanical potentials of wood based on the speed of their waves’ propagation only enabled calculating the dynamic elasticity modulus. Getting the static elasticity modulus, in order to correlate the parameters of different testing modalities, required parallel mechanical testing of that particular wooden material. The scaling of stress sound method for testing the hardness of wood, using the analogue principle of directing pressure force and sound waves in accordance with wood fibers direction, resulted in the speed of sound propagation and the hardness of wood parameters’ equalisation. In this way a method for in situ assessments of the hardness of carrying elements in wooden architectural structures was established, by comparing it with the standard based on the strain limits (JUS U.C9.200/300), in accordance with the kind, class and dimensions of timber. Considering the fact that stress sound method scaling was done on test tubes cut out of healthy wood with particular hygroscopic moisture, in situ assessment of carrying structural elements could be done based on known speed values of sound propagation in healthy wood. The results of our research, based on the spectral analysis of sound wave propagation, show that their application enables a direct assessment of the carrying wooden beams’ hardness and, therefore, a direct assessment of the structure stability itself, thus meeting the objective of this research. 7