The paper examines the position of architectural Modernism as the codex that shapes disciplinary knowledge, assuming a dialectical pattern characterized by internal contradiction. Modernism represented a historical milestone in terms of geometrical attributes of a building, achieving a decisive leap from the representability of the classical language to the abstract unity of form, space and function. By establishing universal paradigms, the movement itself sought to overcome the divergent conditions of architectural activity, formalizing its processes and giving them a systematic character as the basis for constituting of an autonomous discipline. Modernism was the epistemological construction site where the entire new order of practice was built, whose constructs, through historical narratives, surpassed the totality of professional experience. The basic motive of the dissertation is the gap between the internal perspective of creative process and the external, objective states of architecture that constitute the whole of the professional reality. In the changed conditions of time, the concepts of architectural discourse maintained an abstract and dialectical character, losing the terminological precision and transparency of the language, as well as the power to clearly mark the phenomena of the immediate professional environment. The current context destabilizes not only the methodological authority of the process the architects could still rely on at the end of the last century, but also any kind of consistency that would serve as the basis for the constitutive difference of the contemporary architectural form. Its emancipation from the obligation to express social and historical values does not provide our contemporaries with a real opportunity to be guided exclusively by their own imagination and responsibility in design, or to freely re-examine their architecture from scratch, without even needing society from which they would derive a creative impulse. While computer based techniques and technology put unimaginable productive powers in the hands of an individual, the realm of values becomes vague and elusive, unformed and subject to re-examination that can fulfill the entire working life of an architect. The challenge of today's architecture is the privatized idea of originality, which requires finding genuine patterns on a case by case basis, while the responsibility for their possible failure cannot be transferred to the system, but it borne exclusively by a creative subject. The distance and impermanence of the systematic structure, together with vague, elusive environment, the demands of which are constantly changing, are inconsistent with the abstract character of the disciplinary meta-language and its universal terms where the dialectical narratives are still embedded. Position, projection, form and style are the crucial elements for the structure of the work, playing the role of vertical backbones through architectural discourses of historical epochs. They are considered as basic concepts of architecture, because they point to its fundamental contents within definitions that have changed over time. The analysis of terms starts with exploring of the etymology of identified words, in order to determine their form and meaning that show the historical places of discursive transformations. The dissertation aims to interpret the epistemological conditions of architectural activity by finding strongholds in the social history of architecture, relying on the methods of comparative art theory that succeeds in moving away from the formalistic aesthetics. The main assumption is that the difficulties in describing of the current professional status can theoretically be localized solely by a critical review of the references established by the Modern Movement. The "decomposition" of the narratives through creation of the new ones that adapt more comfortably to the current state cannot resolve the discursive crisis, more comprehensive and deeper than the visible scope of professional theory and critique. The questionable position of architectural modernism refers to the delimitation of identity figures that are most directly affected by the loss of the historical focus, but continue to determine the practice in its spectral form.