The present dissertation focuses on the research of architectural space as
a form of communication. In this communication, an intense relationship
between the space and its user occurs. Therefore, the research is focused
on the experience of architectural space in the process of this type of
communication. If we start from the fact that architectural space is
defined by a range of aspects, physically present or only suggested, those
aspects represent the subject of this research and the perceptual
properties of the overall architectural composition. That entails studying
the ways in which one can manipulate the elements of the architectural
form and their relations, in order to influence the user’s perception or
the way they use the space.
The second part of the research is focused on the architecture of
Christian sacral buildings from the second half of the XX century. Sacral
architecture is a space of pronounced two-way communication between
the user and the space, and also of manipulation through design and
ambiance, in order to achieve a specific experience of the space and a
spiritual experience. By shaping the architectural space, a contemplative
ambiance that expresses the transcendent and the “ineffablež is built.
Examples from the given period provide an insight into modern
interpretations of sacral architecture and the new ways of shaping
expressive sacral spaces.
The study aims to examine the ways in which architectural space affects
the user and to predict the direction of the experience of its segments or
the entire space. I In the research process, the focus is placed on
sacral architecture, as a polygon for examining the manipulation of the
experience of space.. Preference is given to examples of architectural
objects of polished expression without the application of decorative
elements, and the research aims to analyze and explain the application of
subdued architectural elements as the only instruments used to build
expressive and/or contemplative spaces.