The focal question of the role of typo–morphology in the new urban concepts of Belgrade housing – is refracting by problematizing the identification of the very concrete examples of a built housing environment. The complexity of the subject in consideration conditioned the creation of a special, multi–tactical methodological platform–composite – of superimposed typo–morphological and typological analysis, comparative– theoretical and complex architectural–urban analysis. The methodological apparatus resulted in a set of defining evaluation criteria – enabling the undeniable insight/separation, as well as further examinations of the earliest realizations of modernized residential urban settlements. Through analyzing the Belgrade collective housing of that time – it has been proven beyond any doubt – that only the urban settlements of “Julino brdož (1966–1970) and Block 19a (1975–1982) – both the achievement of the author team Lojanica, Cagić, Jovanović – are accomplishing all eleven criteria inherent to the new housing concepts. Those urban developments were therefore considered further as case studies, and moreover, in the final part of the thesis – they are completed with the analytical examination of three additional, relevant research and study projects. The principal research orientation is posed in the examination of the types of relation between the open public spaces and the residential buildings of the settlement. Eventually, it revealed the motives of generating the overall residential structure from the dynamic potentials of the hierarchy of graded external architectural spaces as a mode of essentially re–examining the structural possibilities of the innovated urban matrix, in the formation of more compact, truly urban quarters. Their effectiveness was also developed by remodeling the housing typology – trough the poetic uncovering by the negligence of modern architecture the denied memory capacities of housing in the creation of a uniquely recognizable. This non–generic identity of the newly originated place, uncovered itself as a resultant of ethically and successively design–qualitative value–changed approaches. The subject dissertation broadly confirms the crucial importance of scientific research methodologies in design too, based on the consistency of theoretical deliberations of the observed complexity of spatial challenges. Continuity of the author’s design interests and aspirations – is decisive for the formation of new concepts of the housing urbanity.