Cupolae with concave polyhedral surfaces аrе studied as geometrical forms, and also as interesting structures for use in architecture and construction. Polyhedra which follow the method of generating geometric cupolae (Johnson’s solids), except for the convexity criterion and the fact that in the lateral surface of the solids two or more series of equilateral triangles appear, are named Concave Cupolae (with determined sort). The sort of the Cupola is dictated by the number of the rows of equilateral triangles in the plane net of the lateral surface. Equilateral triangles are grouped into spatial hexahedral elements which are polar arrayed around the central axis of polyhedron, making a deltahedral lateral surface of the polyhedron. Over the same polygonal base, there are more different Concave Cupolae of the same sort. In the thesis, the geometric constructions and other graphic procedures (such as 3D modeling) have been applied, by which we can present any Cupola from the observed group, and which have enabled finding the correlation of the parameters, dimensions and elements of the solids. Modeling of the Concave Cupolae of the fourth sort is enabled by programming in MATLAB software. By the systematization of Concave Cupolae properties, the maximum number of each sort’s representatives has been determined, as well as the basic parameters of the Concave Cupolae of the higher sorts. Based on these constructions, the parameters of the solids can be determined also by the analytical methods, using iterative numerical procedures. The new polyhedral structures have been presented, obtained by variations of concave bicupolae, using the procedures of gyrations, elongations, gyroelongations, and augmentations. The Concave Cupolae can be elongated also by Concave Antiprisms of second sort, which constructive geometric generating has been elaborated. We have established the relationship between theoretical assumptions and their practical solutions in architectural mčtier, thus the research shows that the observed polyhedral representatives have practical applications.