Contemporary classical architecture is an important problem field in the recent history and theory of architecture. Its growing presence on the contemporary architectural scene elicits a study into its genesis and modes of presentation; a critical analysis of its protagonists’ ideas; a synthetic exploration into the main problems of displaying the history of ideas underpinning classical architecture; and finally, a formulation of a comprehensive set of notions related to this modern phenomenon. This study deals with the theoretical positions of contemporary classical architects with which they explain their work; moreover, it attempts at defining relations and establishing a continuum of ideas between contemporary classical architects and the theoreticians of Renaissance architecture. Furthermore, insight is provided into the manifestations of theoretical thought on contemporary classical architecture within modern architectural theory along with the definitions of the authors’ theoretical views upon which it has been classified as a significant theoretical form of architecture in the 21st century. Theoretical considerations behind contemporary classicism in architecture are clearly distinguished from those of other contemporaneous theoreticians. In their individualistic approach to the history of architecture and attitudes towards the ideas of collectivism, historicism, the spirit of the times, and formalism they group with the Renaissance theorists. Collectivism and historicism are rejected with the view that a piece of art is not determined by the random and volatile context to which an individual (artist) belongs. They maintain the thesis on history in which the laws of each art are perfected over time, first by formalizing the corpus of facts observed on the buildings in the history of architecture, then by evaluation and examination of these facts, and finally, by their sublimation and transformation into abstract types and general rules for the modern user. They advocate formalism in architecture which annihilates the zeitgeist. Aesthetic qualities associated with architecture arise from the properties defined by the spatial model of the building so that it is the form rather than the meaning which is believed to contribute to architectural evaluation; it is argued that in the design process the architectural form is set first, and only then its articulation into ideas is considered. In the first part of the study, the general theoretical principles of the history and theory of architecture are grouped into subheadings according to precise methodological criteria, and are then cross-referenced to the theoretical arguments presented in the second part. There are seven key themes singled out from the specific theoretical views on contemporary classical architecture and seven new thematic and theoretical positions are established within the topic, which provide the basis for the reading into the theory of contemporary classicism in architecture and its relationship with the Renaissance. The developed diachronic exposition of theoretical positions in architecture, encompassing its complex and multi-faceted relation with a wider cultural field of social sciences, yielded a new interpretation of contemporary phenomena in architectural history and theory.