This work researches the possibilities of urban design process for integration of different interests and values in urban regeneration. This process is characterized by multiple interrelated dimensions: subjective-imaginative, communicative-social, interdisciplinary and technical-technological. Communicative-social dimension poses a question of usage the other ones in overcoming barriers for open communication; that is crucial for value integration in the process of urban regeneration. The main hypothesis is that multidimensional process of urban design can enable greater possibility for the integration. This is essential for affirmation of cultural-historic ambiental values as well as for creating new ones in devastated urban areas without valuable heritage. The subject of the research is a process of urban design through exploring its nature, phases, elements and techniques in line with sustainable urban regeneration. Urban design will be explored as a process that integrates spatial-physical; technical-technological; economic; social and environmental dimension in urban regeneration. The subject of the research will be seen and discussed as a field in which is possible to integrate horizontal and vertical values. This integration defines global and local identity of urban regeneration. The main problem is affirmation and definition of ambiental values in the process of urban design. Ambiental values are the subject of urban regeneration. On theoretical level the problem is researched in relation with two dominant paradigms of urban decision making: instrumental-rational and collaborative. In wider, philosophical context, the problem is in the field of heuristic and questioning the existence of universal values. In this position problem is in integration of parallel presence of legitimate rationalities and subjective images of realities. On practical level the problem is related to the research of dominant discipline for urban regeneration in between urban planning and urban design. This is supported by contradictory processes of globalization as well as with the importance of affirmation and creation of local and global identity. The leading research questions are: Is it possible to integrate instrumental-rational and collaborative paradigm in the process of affirmation and creation ambiental values? What is a dominant discipline that should enable this kind of integration, developing multidimensional identity of space? The relevancy of the questions is in the fact that network society brings new relation between local and global identity that is risky, usually frustrated and unstable. The hypothesis is that the core of the problem is in the barriers for Habermas’s open communication and communicative action. This hypothesis defines the thesis of the research: Urban design as a process can create conditions for open communication building up creative and artistic milieu by defining the dynamic model of the process. Therefore, the main hypothesis is: Urban design as a process realizes higher level of integration and greater quality of urban regeneration. Higher level of integration is possible to achieve by building up creative milieu as an instrument of communicative action. In line with this, I believe that it is possible to define a model of urban design process that will integrate different types of rationalities into a ‘New Unity’. The aims of the research are: (1) Defining the conditions for integration of cultural-historic and newly created values in urban regeneration process; (2) Defining the elements of ambiental values in multidimensional process of urban design; (3) Defining the relation between urban planning, urban design and urban regeneration; (4) Developing an integrative model of urban design for the process of urban regeneration; (5) Defining the characteristics of such a model; (6) Defining the conditions under the model functions. The expected results of the research are: (a) Systematization of present theories, approaches, concepts and paradigms in urban design, urban planning and urban regeneration: (b) Defining guidelines for using integrative model of urban design; (c) The compendium of possible methods and techniques for integration of different values and interests in the process of urban regeneration; (d) Defining the set for the designing the process of integrative urban design in relation to the diversity of urban regeneration contexts. The applicability of the results is in the development of urban theory and practice in the fields of urban design and urban regeneration on local level; especially important for the processes of integration Serbia into EU. The purpose of the research is in: systematization of different theoretical and conceptual approaches of urban design, planning and regeneration; the guidelines for designing the urban design process in different contexts; compendium of possible methods and techniques for such a process and defining a set for the choosing the appropriate ones. On theoretical level the research method is founded on comparative analysis of different theories in urban decision making, urban planning and design that are in the domain of instrumental-rational and collaborative paradigm. The comparison will be guided by possibilities and restraints of the process in creation of ambiental values and sustainable space. As a result of wider theoretical and philosophical consideration I will define a starting model of urban design process. On practical level method is based on analysis of three examples (multiple case studies) that differ according to their spatial scale and the nature of the process of urban regeneration. This diversity of cases is a way for examining the openness and dynamism of the initial theoretical model in relation to the changing urban contexts as well as for verification of the starting hypothesis. In that manner, it will be possible to define general principles for integrative urban design in sustainable urban regeneration. Multiple case studies are base for verification of starting hypothesis and functionality of the theoretical model.