The thesis aims at researching the role of urban planning in the process of brownfield regeneration, as one of the most complex sustainable land-use mechanisms. The peculiarity of brownfield regeneration is best seen in the specific way of financing of that process. Namely, the mentioned process requires the funding of public sector and also private capital, but not always does private sector show interest in investing in brownfield land. Nevertheless, whenever this actor decides to take part in the process of brownfield regeneration, private interest becomes difficult to control i.e. the crucial skill in this process is seen as sole balancing between public and private interests. In addition to establishing the cooperation between public and private sector, what also contributes to success of brownfield regeneration is the integration of sector policies focusing on different domains (traffic, environment, local and regional development, etc.). Since planning can be understood as a form of state intervention in the market, this research focuses on the assessment of planning reproach to the process of brownfield regeneration. The basic research hypothesis referred to the advantage of this process being realized through the means of collaborative planning model, comparing to other models (e.g. rational planning model). This assumption was based on a view that an efficient and effective decision-making process about brownfield regeneration needed harmonised interests, as well as synergy of knowledge and skills, and is carried out by interested parties which are involved in a given process. This leads to the next hypothesis which referred to the position of planning expertise in the process of brownfield regeneration. Hence, it was assumed that a successful realisation of brownfield regeneration process was a direct consequence of the synthesis of experts' knowledge (as the main feature of rational planning model), but also the skills of negotiation, facilitation and meditation ingrained in collaborative planning model. Considering the fact that planners' activity is inseparable from the specific context in which it takes place, it is important to review transformation and adaptation of the institutional framework to collaborative planning model, which leads to the next hypothesis. Therefore, it was presumed that an effective process of brownfield regeneration required a formal institutional framework which enables collaboration, as IX follows: collaboration of sectors, disciplines and institutions at the horizontal level, but also at the vertical planning levels, as well as the functioning of public-private partnerships. Besides, institutional transformation means incentive to informal planning approach and innovative procedures to regulate the participation of a range of different stakeholders in the planning process. Planning as a process was especially emphasised through planning paradigm review in the theoretical part of the research. More precisely, what was being observed was the way of planning, decision-making and especially planning expertise position, since the degree and manner of participants' collaboration in the planning process is to be determined with respect to it. Before planning paradigm review, a short review of the management model, as the context in which given planning models take place, was given. Among numerous classifications of management types, there were three models given. They could serve as a measure for management estimation in the real context, but could also serve for defining positions of different participants in this process. Namely, these are coordinative, competitive and communicative (argumentative) model, mainly stressing the roles, responsibilities and accountabilities of the main participants included and influenced by management. With regard to the growth in internationalisation of planning throughout the 20th century, planning paradigm shift was firstly analysed in the Anglo-Saxon i.e. developed context, followed by the review of the specific characteristics of paradigm change in post-socialist countries. In the second part of theoretical research framework the attention was being given to collaborative planning model and subjects which were relevant to the process of brownfield regeneration within this model – collaboration of stakeholders, harmonisation of interests, conflict solving, reaching a consensus, planners' skills and knowledge, different ways of implementation, etc. For the reason of elaboration of basic hypothetical aspects of the overall research (the effective ways of collaboration, the adequate planning expertise, as well as optimal institutional arrangements), the basic concepts of the three chosen theories which meet demands put forward by the brownfield regeneration problem were reviewed. Therefore, for the subject of collaboration especially important is the actor-network theory, dealing with network- forming as a basic form of participant organisation in a complex processes. From the perspective of planning expertise, i.e. planners' knowledge and skills, the theory of negotiation is important, since it stresses the relevance of experts in negotiation as a part X of collaborative process, whereas institutional theory deals with the aspect of institutional framework of developing processes. These theoretical arguments represent the basis for defining general research questions, which were afterwards analysed as principles of conceptual model of stakeholders' collaboration in the process of brownfield regeneration. Special contribution of this model lies in the fact that it actually represents means of evaluation of different approaches to brownfield regeneration, within the chosen examples shown in the practical part of the research. The methodology of the research is adjusted to general research questions, hypothesis and research goals. More precisely, the practical goal of the research is to establish and represent ways of brownfield regeneration, at the same time reviewing to which degree is the applied principle actually collaborative. The spatial coverage of the research involved the countries which territorially belong to the Danube basin – Switzerland, Austria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, and finally, Serbia. Since this research does not aim at representing only one example of brownfield regeneration, but at reaching general conclusions through analysis of the multiple empirical data, a multiple case study was being imposed as the adequate method. Having in mind the goals of this research, the most important methods used within the case study were: 1. analysis of the content of primary and secondary sources which are related to institutional context of brownfield regeneration process (institutional structure and documents) by which it was actually being checked whether certain institutional context enabled and encouraged collaborative planning approach; 2. assessment of chosen stakeholders, used for establishing the ways of collaboration among dominant stakeholders, positions of planning expertise and presence of informal approach in the concrete process of brownfield regeneration. Hence, the essence of methodological approach was related to the revision of collaborative procedures during brownfield regeneration. Research confirmed the thesis that brownfield regeneration asked for realization within collaborative planning model. The thesis on planers' expertness as the synthesis of experts' knowledge, on the one hand, and the collaboration and mediation skills throughout the process of brownfield regeneration, on the other hand, is confirmed. Finally, the collaboration of different sectors under jurisdiction of public administration at the horizontal level, but also between different vertical levels of planning, as well as the institutionalization of informal planning approach contributes to the satisfactory outcome of the process of brownfield regeneration. XI The contribution of the research is twofold. The first group of results is related to the development of theoretical and methodological approach for formulation of principles in brownfield regeneration. Apart from that, conceptual model of stakeholders' collaboration in the process of brownfield regeneration represents evaluation mechanism of different approaches to a given process. The second group of results is practical, and refers to European experiences, but also to experiences of brownfield regeneration in Serbia. In the context of foreign brownfield regeneration examples, the contribution of the research primarily refers to the representation of planning and decision making in the specific institutional context – in developed, as well as post- socialist countries. Additionally, each of the analysed case studies offers the efficient models (stakeholders' collaboration, planning expertise and institutional organisation) for brownfield regeneration approach. A significant contribution made by the research is the review of the current state of brownfield regeneration in Serbia and, especially, the estimation of the influence of institutional and legislative framework on the planning of brownfield regeneration, as well as providing guidelines for the given process. The goal here is to actually redefine the character of urban planning in the domain of brownfield regeneration in Serbia.