In conceiving and writing this paper, a starting aim was to research, analyze and publish so far unknown archive materials that have unveiled extensive construction activities in the interwar period. By the material systemization and analysis, and providing the explanation of certain phenomena, we tried to depict less known activities of the Architectural Department of the Ministry of Construction in the period from 1919 to 1941. In order to get familiar with this significant period of the modern Serbian civil engineering, and to analyze and evaluate it, the so far published papers and material of the interwar period were used. One of the main goals of this paper is to present the organization and activities of the Architectural Department of the Ministry of Construction, in the inter war period, in a broader social and economic context. Its actual position and role in the complex process of architectural and urban design of settlements situated all over the country were examined by analyzing the scope of activities, competences and functioning of the Department, construction methods, issuing a call for tenders, and realized and unrealized designs developed at the Ministry. Reconstructing the process of creation of certain public buildings through the research of preserved material, a complex process of their construction, from concept to realization, has been brought to light. In the interwar period the Architectural Department of the Ministry of Construction, using its creative capacities, legislations, and by setting up the clear work methods used in the designing and construction of public buildings and town planning, established a significant creative and professional potential for everything that was happening in the modern Serbian architecture. The Ministry of Construction as the highest construction administrative and supervisory authority was one of the crucial factors that had impact on the development of architecture in this region. Cities, towns and small towns throughout the country represent important evidence of the variety of activities carried out by the Architectural Department of the Ministry of Construction in the interwar period. Designs, urban and regulation plans developed by the Ministry of Construction in this period determined buildings’ physiognomy and the architectural and urban appearance which, in most cases, have remained the same up to the present day.