As much the humanity, in its historical development, progressed particularly in creation of material goods and humanization of relationships, the powers and means of destruction and violence were developed maybe even more intensively. By its action these powers led people, for the sake of their safety and protection, to make their best efforts in development of total system of safety and defense. Thus the list of objective and possible dangers is everyday added with new ones, which exceed the previously observed in its scope of potential effect and destruction. This recording also evenly includes dangers that appear or could appear in war or in peace. Basically, due to a lot of financial means globally invested into ‘the competition in arms’, the most of scientific inventions are firstly use for military purposes which undoubtedly indirectly affects the development of a city which is the core of government, administration, management, wealth and its forms. In the aspect of physical arrangement of cities, the opinion is that: technologies of work, technologies in production and new powers; military technology and military techniques; technologies in transport, movement and communication; technology of communal infrastructure, make the basic connection points of engineering and technologies and physical structure of a city. Events within processes of the town up-growth cannot be considered beyond the time context (the level of production powers’ development, achieved level of military engineering, the manner for armed battles, political and military alliances, social and economic surrounding, architectural-town planning concepts of a town development etc.), so the main feature of the researches is related to historical approach in all fields. According to the above mentioned, the opinion is that within the total progress of military technologies and war techniques three key history events may be underlined as the milestones for town planning of cities, i.e. they made a great influence to the up-growth and shape of cities in periods after their occurrence: invention and utilization of fire-arms (conventional arms) to the end of World War II invention and utilization of nuclear arms (to the end of 20th century); invention and utilization of cosmic technology with utilization of arms of great blasting-effect and accuracy (remote action, ‘smart fire-bombs’, cruise missile, laser arms).Based on collected information on the research subject it could be stated that towns and military technologies i.e. war techniques are closely connected phenomena. A town, in a long time period, was impossible to imagine without defense power visible also in physical arrangement of the town. Conquest of towns was equal to conquest of the world and countries. History of cities might be a history of defense and attack.