Elliptic hyperboloid of one sheet (EHOS) is the general case of a double curved surface, from the family of ruled surfaces, which generates by ruling of a line–generator along three directing skewed lines, in the space. The dissertation gives an answer to a task – finding a new approach in creating constructive–geometry "boundaries" for this surface in the space settlement. A wide range of constructive procedures, for the determination and mutual relations of the main parameters of EHOS: center of the surface, orthogonal axes, planes of symmetry, minimal section curve (elliptical "throat") and its vertexes came out from the concept of hexagramic spatial "carrier" of two times three directors – skewed lines, in variety of their positions. The employment of procedures and scientifically based methods of Projective Synthetic Geometry, Descriptive Geometry and tools of computer graphics, in 3D surroundings (using Auto CAD software for engineers), are of importance for the scientific contributions of this dissertation, achieved solutions – constructive procedures and theoretical conclusions, in the sphere of geometry of ruled surface EHOS and its types. In the constructive procedures of spatial affine transformations of hyperboloids of one sheet, whose directing lines are "inscribed" in three sided prisms, the invariants of all the types of transformations are determined. Further investigations, concerning relations of general and special types of HOS, inside the same family of surfaces, are initiated by settled principles. The analysis of all the types of sections of EHOS, including the correlation to the polar properties of the surface, resulted with theoretical base, as an input for the practical application of "whole" surface or its fragments, in the procedures of 3D geometrical modeling. The models – structures, above regular patterns (polygons) are created by 3D procedures and tools, using fragments of straight or inclined EHOS. They represent the prototypes for the creative palette of possible architectural shapes of roofs or buildings. Very similar results came out of the part of research, concerning intersections of EHOS and basic second order surfaces (primitives): cone, cylinder and sphere. The "combinations" of such surfaces, in 3D geometrical modeling procedures, offered just some directions, like an initiation and inspiration for the architects and civil engineers. Some results of the research are realized through the two applications in the engineering software Auto CAD (written in Auto–lisp programming language), which uses circular sections of EHOS, for the procedure of generating wire frame or realistic surface model, with triangulated net. The applicability of the sections, along the generator (line) and circles, is very important for the building practice, which needs the simplicity, while the aesthetic values of the form are maintained. This thesis brought up the significance of educational contributions, because of it's incite and the indications of possibilities of new geometric–constructive settings for the practical use of the geometrical surfaces.