The need for information is growing at all levels, from decision makers at the national and intrenational level to the lowest level of the individual. One of the big contemporary challenges is the development of information support to sustainable development. Efforts are focused on the development of ICT tools based on GIS technologies, which provide efficient collection, storage, updating, handling, analyzing and displaying all forms of data and information related to territory, necessary for the understanding of the territory in the process of collective decision making and the creation of sustainable policies and plans. In sustainable development, everybody is a user and information resource. Integrated approach to sustainability requires development and wide use of contemporary planners and management methods, tools, techniques and procedures that provide the best possible interpretation and integrated analysis of territory in group decision- making on specific actions and assessment of their impacts, risks and benefits for environmental, social and economic development. This research is motivated by the need to create conditions for effective participation of Serbia in the current global development process. At present, activities at local and regional level in the area of improving the information base for decision making and monitoring of integrated territorial development have focused on the development and application of the concept of territorial information systems based on ICT and GIS technologies in order to achieve greater efficiency administration, qualitative improvement of vertical and horizontal coordination, cooperation and rationalization processes in information and communication activities, with emphasis on raising the quality of the information base for decision making. The survey of international experience in developing and implementing this kind of models helps understanding the possibilities and limits of its application in Serbia. The subject of this research is development of territorial information system model to support sustainable urban development in Serbia, as a new instrument of communication and decision support tools in the process of collaborative planning and development management at the local level. The research is aimed at TIS model structuring that would be aplicable in the current conditions of change planning paradigms and practices of planning, but also in future when it is expected a new model of planning based on active participation of all actors of development to established. Application of the model TIS in Serbia should on the one hand, contribute to processes of change and improvements in the system of urban planning and spatial development, and on the other, direct role of planners redefinition to assist them in finding answers to operational questions of who?, As ?, why?, what?, how?, which are daily placed in front of the local community in terms of sustainable urban development. The result of this study should be scientifically-based operational model of TIS to support sustainable urban development in Serbia, structuraly defined at all levels - substantive, functional and institutional - organizational, and methodology of its implementation at the local level confirmed through pilot projects. The scientific contributions of this research is to create a new basis for further theoretical and conceptual redefinition of the planning system in Serbia, questioning the role planners and planners agencies, and ultimately the basis for the development of new methods and techniques of planning in Serbia as a new qualitatively improved information base.