The presented study is a scientific study that deals with residential architecture in Vojvodina and palaces and villas designed in the Art Nouveau style in the period that includes the last decade of XIX and the beginning of XX century to the First World War. The Introduction discusses the subject of work, goals and tasks of research, starting hypotheses and scientific research methods. The case considered in this study is a comprehensive analysis of artistic, cultural and sociological aspects related to the emergence of a strong middle class, as the most important investors in Vojvodina in late nineteenth and early twentieth century, and their influence on the development of residential architecture. Case studies of character of the typical residential buildings designed in the spirit of Secession were selected as representatives of residential houses and palaces in the environment in which they are incurred. The main goal of this research was to study the detailed architecture of residential buildings - palaces and villas built in Vojvodina since the first forms of Art Nouveau in the last decade of the nineteenth century to the closing of this stylistic expression 1914th year. The introduction presents the basic and initial hypotheses regarding the timing of secession in Vojvodina, then mixing stylistic influence of large centers and local communities, the impact of different ethnic groups and individual investors on the architecture, as well as the contribution of the residential buildings and villas made the process of urbanization towns from the early XX century. Under the influence of these different tendencies local architects created a unique and very original works of authorship. The second chapter is entitled "The historical and social conditions in Europe and Vojvodina in late nineteenth and early twentieth century and the emergence of new architectural expression." Begins with a brief review of the European society at the turn of the centuries with an emphasis on major changes in various aspects of life, including rapid technological development, demographic changes in the major cities, the development of civil society and VII democracy. Special emphasis is placed on the period of fin-de-siecle Vienna considering that the metropolis had the greatest impact on the region of Vojvodina. In the late 19th and early 20th century in Europe appear new stylistic expression that is called by different names in different parts of the continent. In Paris and Brussels called Art Nouveau, Liberty in Italy, Jugendstil in Germany, Secession in Austria, the Modern Style in United Kingdom, while in Eastern Europe often called the national style as was the case in Hungary. This chapter gives a brief overview of the development of new styles in different parts of Europe, as well as the work of architects who participated in its creation such as Hector Guimard, Victor Horta, Henry van de Velde, Charles Mackintosh, Scott Baillie, Otto Wagner, Josef Hoffmann, Adolf Loos, Jože Plecnik, Ödön Lechner, Károly Kós, Antonio Gaudi and others. In the study is also presented the historical circumstances in Vojvodina at the Turn-of- the-centuries, and then the general characteristics of the development towns from their architecture. Particularly significant period of economic growth took over the last two decades of the nineteenth and the first decade of the twentieth century, when there was a boom of construction in towns of Vojvodina. The greatest impetus in this area felt in Subotica, and then other cities. There were built many public and private buildings, and of historical importance for the development of settlements was the construction of the railway network. In Vojvodina can be split several ways in which has developed a new style, such as Vienna Secession (and Jugendstil with the influences of Darmstadt), Hungarian Secession or Hungarian national style that would later evolve under the influence of "The Young" and at the end vernacular architecture inspired by Arts end Krafts movement and impacts of national styles in Eastern Europe. At the end of the second chapter presents the biographies of the most important authors who created in the spirit of the new architecture in Vojvodina such as Ferenc Raichle, Jakab Dezső, Marcell Komor, Bela Lajta, Rezső Hikisch, Lipot Baumhorn, Gyula Partos, Milan Tabaković, Herman Bolle and others. The title of the third chapter is: "The characteristics and location of residential villas and palaces in urban structure." There is explained the origin of the term "palace" and "villa" since ancient times, and then interpreted their meaning through various historical epochs. In the context of Vojvodina at the turn of the centuries, the residential palace is considered a representative of public facility or residential purposes, usually built within the urban block in VIII central areas of the cities. The modern meaning of the term "villa" is usually related to a detached residences built in suburban or rural area for housing of middle-class. Investors who built these buildings at the turn of the centuries, as well as those who lived in them were mostly middle, upper-middle or upper class. At the turn of the 20th century, cities are expanding and palaces were built and the edge of the city centers, often in the direction of newly built railway station and near the parks. The fourth chapter is entitled "Residential palaces built at the end of the nineteenth century, which anticipated new architectural expression." This section provides general characteristics of the residential architecture of that period. There you can find a detailed analysis of four valued object: Leović Palace in Subotica, Špicer castle in Beocin, Scheherazade Palace in Zrenjanin and the Palace of Lajos Fazekas in Subotica. Leović Palace is the first building with Art Nouveau elements in Vojvodina, and one of the co-architect of the project is the most important Hungarian Secession architect Eden Lehner. Špicer castle is also one of the oldest buildings with elements of Art Nouveau, and it is significant because of using the experimental method of construction slag-concrete. Scheherazade Palace is a rare example of combining Moorish and Art Nouveau style in Vojvodina, and Lajos Fazekas Palace is the first building on which they are applied reinforced concrete structure. At the beginning of the fifth chapter, entitled "Residential buildings and villas in Vojvodina, in the spirit of Art Nouveau 1900-1914", are presented general characteristics of residential architecture at the beginning of the XX century. The most significant examples are shown divided into four groups. The first group consists of palaces and villas built under the influence of the Viennese Secession and the flow of international art nouveau style. The most significant examples are the Palace on Main Street in Bečej, Adamović palace in Novi Sad, Konjović Palace in Sombor, Goldsmith House and Elec villa in Zrenjanin, Lepedat Palace in Kikinda, Vitigšlager Palace in Pančevo, City Renting Palace in Subotica, Rajs and Lindenšmid villas in Bačka Palanka and the Fernbah Castle in Aleksa Šantić. In the second group of examples are analyzed buildings in the style of the Hungarian Secession and the Hungarian national style such as Raichle Palace and the Palace of Subotica merchant bank in Subotica, Menratova Palace and Tomin Palace in Novi Sad, Singer Palace, Vajdinger Palace and building in the Paris street 2 in Sombor, Cairo Palace and Tomanova villa in Vrbas, Popa villa in Novi Sad and Ertl villa in Odzaci. The third group consists of residential buildings and villas in IX Vojvodina formed under the influence of vernacular architecture including Konen villa at Palic, the summer house Višnjevac near Veliki Radinci, Fisher's farm at Ruma and family villa in Kula. The architecture of these buildings was evaluated such as their impact on the development and construction of settlements in Vojvodina. Adamovic Palace and the Palace Konjović are characterized by inverse solution of the floorplan. Fernbah castle is a significant work of young author which brings Darmstadt influences from the early XX century. Raichle Palace is one of the most significant works of the Hungarian Secession in general and Vajdinger and Singer palaces captures the spirit of "The Young". Very authentic realization based on vernacular ideas is Fisher farm, which just like Višnjevac, Konen villa and villa in Kula, was partly inspired by the English Arts Krafts end movement. In the sixth chapter or The Conclusion is confirmed initial hypotheses about the timing of the new style and the strong influence of the big metropolis and the local traditions, the influence of investors from different ethnic groups as well as the residential palace of art nouveau influence on the development of architecture and settlements in Vojvodina. The amounts of the facts are related to the impact of a Jewish community in the development of art nouveau in Hungary, as well as in today's Vojvodina which is indicative of the origin of many architects and investors. Many buildings which were built in the new style were designed by some of the most significant architects of the Austrian-Hungarian like Eden Lehner, Bela Lajta, Denes Györgyi, Dezso Jakab, Marcel Komor, Lipot Baumhorn and others. Some of them have made their best realization in Vojvodina. The special characteristic of architecture at the turn of the century, which makes this area interesting for the study gives the fact that the Vojvodina was some kind of multicultural conglomerate during this period. Due to this fact there were active architects formed in different environments and under different influence peddling, which contributed to the diversity of stylistic expression in a relatively small geographic area. This study should contribute to better understanding of architecture at the turn of the centuries in Vojvodina as part of the architectural heritage of Middle Europe and Europe as a whole, as well as a more complex evaluation of these facilities in the local community and their future permanent preservation and revitalization.