The research is devoted to the creation of a model for classifying building elements and related sitework in the design documentation. The nature of the design and construction process requires creation and collection of a wide range of information at each stage of the of the building life cycle. Specifics of this process requires a clear format which will provide transmission of the information consistently among different phases. Directions of construction development and tendencies of the world’s highly developed systems indicate that it is necessary to pay more attention to the process preceding the construction, which certainly includes the detailed planning and coordination of design and building documentation, leading to the most important goals, such as improving quality, reducing time and controling construction costs. The processing of the design documentation is a necessary element in the contracting process for building construction and it is required in order to comply with both national and international standards and provide an easier management of the building process, as well as faster and more accurate construction cost estimates in the early stages of the investment cycle. Analysis of the state of local and global practice crystallized and formed the subject of research: the lack of clearly formulated, science-based nomenclature and classification, which would allow standardization in the development of the design documentation, and therefore improve the relations and processes in all stages of the building life cycle. Structured and standardized design documentation becomes the common link for the transmision of data, descriptions, monitoring and evaluation informations throughout all phases of the project. The research has resulted in the definition of specific criteria according to which a standardized model of classification was formed, based on the elements of the building according to the place and function of the building. The purpose of the model is to provide clear communication between participants in the building process in terms of workload and costs in each stage of the building life cycle. A model of classification based on building elements becomes a design documentation constant base in the highly dynamic process of designing and constructing. At the same time, the model provides flexibility in the further development of building technology and the application of the materials. The model is not dependent on the economic and technological changes that are inevitable, since, it sets the building into a logical, central position in the construction process.