Previous sociological and anthropological classifications of sociability forms place the neighbourhood among communities. Having in mind that in Serbian language for that kind of neighbourhood it is used the term vicinity (komšiluk), but not neighbourhood, this paper is studying finer nuances separating these two terms and testing the presumptions that the neighbourhood is the concept of distance which resists the homogenizing influence of the idea of the community. Other than definitions based on the determinants of topological proximity and those explaining the neighbourhood as the meeting point according to the manner of sharing near, common identity items, the neighbourhood is also described in terms of the open gathering or group form. This work researches that openness – the measure of fitting and the measure of dissociating of group form on the examples of Belgrade neighbourhoods. The aim of the reconsidering the neighbourhood concept is not the delineation of different theoretical approaches, but to introduce the varieties of use of this term in the field of urban planning and to expand the meaning of a term which has been marked with nostalgic return to the idea of community and romantization of sociability based on the solidarity, generosity and love for neighbour. The testing of the thesis that the neighbourhood is not a community understands the review of the togetherness basic principle. Andrew Mason considers that the concept of community falls into the ‘essentially disputable concepts’ wherefore the question is not about the confusion over the meaning which results from a different senses assigned by different persons to a particular term, but about the inconsistence which comes from the very nature of the term (Mason 2000: 1820). The thesis that the neighbourhood is not a community takes into the consideration the disputation of the term community and examines the relation between these two terms whose natures evade the final determination. In other words, the neighbourhood is the place of constant revisions and corrections of the idea of community. Unlike the community on which applies the principle of entirety, the principle of openness is applying on the neighbourhood. This significant difference shows that the neighbourhood patterns are not the ways of organizing an ensemble (concept of a community of persons living together on a definite area) but a way to connect to an open gathering. In spatial term, these are not the ways of grouping or breaking the whole (collective form) but the possibilities of regrouping, measuring, inserting (joining) and separating (suspensions) – these are the ways of maintaining the gathering, namely the group forms open. For the purpose of the re-conceptualization of the idea of the neighbourhood as a spatial concept of sociability, the researches of philosophical and sociological questions of sociability are important. At the same time, a neighbour is a figure which opens new approaches of reflecting the philosophical issues of otherness, a figure which provides different approaches of understanding the sociological issues of social cohesion and a figure which refers towards the new forms of political community and realizations of the idea of the city. Insight to different levels of social cohesion (from solidarity to the atomization), rises the following questions important for the apprehension of the idea of community at the spatial level of the neighbourhood: To which extend the ties of solidarity are the conducted of individual will and sensibility, and to which extend they arise due to a threat, risk, endangerment? In other words, whether the basis of solidarity, that is the interdependence which keeps people together, is compassion, fear or the capacity, the skill to associate? Answers to these questions can be classified, by generalizing, in three groups: the solidarity ties developed out of compassion, conscience and civic awareness. This research paper stand on the responses in third group and points to the possibilities to encourage those abilities and articulate them in space, on the spatial level of the neighbourhood – between the idea of house and the idea of city. Particularly important is the re-conceptualization of the idea of neighbourhood in cities which have negatively experienced the idea of community. This work gives a starting point for the constructing of the idea of new community – inside the neighbourhood plan it is needed to locate that minimal spacing between private and public space and lay out the motive, a stimulus for neighbours to, beside particular interest in given space, see / appreciate the other, recognize obligations to others for the sake of their own preservation. For that reason, the spaces of consideration are constitutive elements of the spatial conception of neighbourhood. The plan of the neighbourhood, that is the norms of spatial and social distance consider the following meanings of the norm: measure – the universal rule; discipline– the measure of the compliance with the circumstances, i.e. available resources and surrounding conditions; restraint– the measure of kindness towards neighbour / stranger / other who is close, closely exists or is temporarily close. Opportunities for ethical acting in small scale between government directives and daily dwellers’ habits are located in the zone indicated by the guidelines of the neighbourhood plan. Considering that neighbours shape the space of their coexistence regarding the norms and customs, but also the space characteristics, the position of common space is not random and therefore is the subject of performed analysis. Guidelines point the directions of the realization of the idea of common space, with suggestions for responsible and regardful use of resources in the immediate surroundings of the housing assembly. Observations on the roles of common space inside the neighbourhood in grading of the individual differences and linking of the different lifestyles into a wide range of safe coexistence are based on the analysis of spatial concepts and conducted scientific research (questionnaire). The questionnaire was designed for the needs of systematization of community experiences of the Belgrade residents. Questions are grouped by conceptual distinctions of the idea of neighbourhood and the idea of community: proximity (preferred distance and the regulation of distance), dissociation (preferences and perceptions of the border), the motif of the association, spontaneous semiology (anecdotes, visual and verbal expressions of the local culture), constructing the difference (tolerance and the results of the interaction visible in space). Comparing of the results of the conducted survey and the outcomes of the analysis of spatial concept leads to the knowledge of the professional and amateur perception of the idea of common space and the possibilities for the implementation of the neighbourhood plan in Belgrade. Interpretation of responses of the conducted survey requires the sociological, anthropological and philosophical expertise which is why it is not conducted within this research. Initiation of the scientific project and continuation of implementation of the Architectural action project in the neighbourhood is in perspective of further application of the research results. Based on the principle of responsible management of the social capital of neighbourhoods the interpretation of the neighbourhood spatial patterns in Belgrade is systematized. Any spatial intervention in housing assembly must take into account the knowledge of planned and designed space conception of underlying urban structure; recognize the motive and not the results of amateur space adaptation, make out the motive of new community which is in terms of energy savings for smaller residential assemblies. By these principles, the clarifications of the guidelines for the neighbourhood re- conceptualization in Belgrade suggested the use of common space that offers the possibility of new community in housing complexes which are currently in atomization state. The constructivist approach advocated in this paper is aimed on finding the opportunities to transform the existing situation of the inherited residential complexes. Transformation is perceived in relation to the concepts on which the settlements are designed, and the research is retained in the line of the re-conceptualizing the idea of neighbourhood.