Serbian mediaeval architecture, the architecture of the rulers’ endowments, was and still is
a materialised testimony to how the Byzantine and consequently the Eastern Christian cultural
tradition was being adopted, which brought an opposing blend of the classical and Hebrew thought,
expressed in the doctrine of the Holy Trinity. Deciphering the trinity principle constitutes a premise
to recognising a theoretical model for interpreting the mediaeval church architecture.
Development of the doctrine and solving the questions about God as a Trinity featured the
Christian thought dependant on the most significant Judaistic ideas and on those of Late Antiquity,
as well as the philosophical conceptual constructions. In analysing and following their adoption, we
notice some advancement in solving the questions of understanding the One and the many, i.e. one
God as the Trinity, which was made manifest already in the teachings of the Cappadocian Fathers
in the 4th century. In a quite significant theological and philosophical text, Corpus Areopagiticum,
dating from the 6th century, a triadological image of the universe was discovered and reconstructed.
It showed an inherited division of theology into kataphatic, symbolic and apophatic. The
Areopagite’s system was constructed of relationships governing among the celestial, ecclesiastical
and earthly hierarchies. Thus devised structure was recognised and assumed as a theoretical model
which enables understanding of complex symbolic images of the Christian world.
For purposes of better understanding, the concept of Trinity is compared with the concept
of the Borromean Rings or Knot made of three interlocking circles or loops. The logic of the
structure is that cutting any loop or ring frees all the other loops so that no two loops can
be directly linked. In the Areopagite’s structure the three rings would be the three Persons: the
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, the apophatic, symbolic and kataphatic theology, the celestial,
the ecclesiastical and the earthly hierarchy, etc. In its centre, inside all the circles, is the Unity, the
unity in multiplicity. Mirrored in the field of architecture, the Trinity principle, as a relationship of
“Three Hypostases in one Ousiaž, completely corresponds to an organic structure of the Byzantine
church architecture and a wider ecclesiastic world.
As a subject of such research, the basic aspects of architecture come first – the form, the
function and the structure. Each of them could be viewed separately, with its qualitative
differences, but at the same time, they could not be separated, as they make architecture complete.
Therefore, considering the hypostases of the Trinity, God the Father, as the First Cause, as
unfathomable, indescribable, immeasurable, corresponds to the function in architecture. It is of a
transcendental character, perfect as a concept, but can only be manifested in a concrete form, which
corresponds completely to revealing God the Father, through God the Son – God-Man. So, God is
manifested in the Son, like function is manifested through form. The hypostasis of Christ
corresponds to form in architecture. Existence of form is not viable if not pervaded by structure, for
in the terms of manifestation, no form can exist without structure, so without the Holy Spirit,
pervading the Son, there would not be God-Man, as well.
By making theology and architecture mutually dependent, an area for recognising a
triadological structure is created, which is in analytical terms a unifying factor in a vast field of
semiotic meanings. Actually, a theological concept designs an architectural space, so the principle
of triadology is manifested through an act of creation.
However, a condition for any consideration of the Christian architecture is the question of
sanctity. The phenomena of sacredness or holiness are conceptually defined in the materialised
figures of the Christian, the Byzantine and consequently the Serbian culture. In the Eastern
Christian tradition, the concept of sanctity is grounded on the Biblical personalism, on the idea of
theocentrism, on personal communion with God, whose sanctification depends on the free will, the
grace of God. Sanctity is limitless, eternal divine existence. Christian philosophers interpret the
sanctity of God as three holy persons, so God is named (in ontological terms) as the Holy Trinity.
In understanding the Eastern Christianity and consequently the Serbian mediaeval church
architecture in structuring the rulers’ endowments as the realms of sanctity in this world
(materialisation of Heaven on Earth), the Holy Trinity of the Old Testament had its significant
role. The concept of the first three divisions of the Tabernacle had its impact on sanctifying the
Land of Hebrews, the city, the people. The process suggests a triadic relation between the ruling
dynasty (the Josiah’s lineage) – the Sanctuary (the place of the eternal Divine Presence) –
Jerusalem (as a holy, celestial, eschatological city). The Christian rulers would try, in accordance
with the theological postulates, to secure the sanctity of their position in the world, but also of their
states, the people and eventually of the place of their eternal rest for the future “sacredž existence
among the “holy onesž.
The Nemanjic’s sacred lineage was constituted upon that model, the rulers building
temples and monasteries as endowments and places of eternal rest. If possible, the ruler becomes a
saint, aspiring to sanctify his nation and the state by his sanctified mediation in order to secure
eternal salvation and the life in the Heavenly Kingdom. Such a system manifests the kataphatic
character of the God chosen dynasty on earth, the symbolic character of the temple which abolishes
the antinomy of the earthly, the created and the heavenly, the non-created with the apophatic
character of the New Jerusalem heavenly existence.
An architect of complex concepts in establishing the religious foundations of the Serbian
mediaeval state and realising ideals of the sacred lineage dynasty was a prince and an Athos Mount
monk, Sava Nemanjic. By building a cult of his father, Simeon Nemanjic, as a founder of the
dynasty, a God chosen ruler of a sacred ancestry, a monk and finally a saint whose model had been
Christ himself, St Sava formed a pattern of how the future Serbian mediaeval rulers would conduct
themselves and be celebrated. Such a pattern, or a model, consisted of a triadic relation in a
political system based upon the relations between the church, the state and the people. But the
system becomes more complex as the sacred lineage develops, when an active ruler builds a
Temple, a monastery, to subsequently leave the throne and assume an “image of a saintž by
becoming a monk, so as to, in his future existence as a holy king and a mediator, secure a place in
the Heavenly Kingdom for his nation. Thus established triadic model, a ruler – a monk – a saint, is
understood as a ruler’s personal relationship with the triune God, expressed in a life in a form of an
existential movement from the earthly towards the heavenly, from the kataphatic via the symbolic
towards the apophatic, from the secular via the monastic towards the sacred.
Integrally designed the Nemanjic rulers’ ideological-theological programme actually
institutionalised the concept of sacredness, fully manifested in an architectural articulation of a
monasterial complex. Through special shaping, a relation was made between the hierarchical
spatial design that supports the monastic way of life and the place where a “sacred kingž resides.
The spatial composition of a monastery and a church in its centre and a monasterial almost circular
wall around it point to a symbolic image of the heavenly Jerusalem (itself being of circular shape),
as the Serbian rulers envisaged the heavenly city on earth.
And again in defining the spatial relations within a circular enclosure of the sacred area
there is a paradigmatic principle consisting of three functional units: the place of liturgy – the
church, the place of the prolonged liturgy – the refectory, the place of continuous prayer – the cell,
the place of work. The relationship between the church, the refectory and other structures, their
mutual spatial interdependence was building a religious hierarchy, together constituting the
supersensory sacred area. Only in its triadological simplicity it would be possible to see the nature
and the complete meaning of the Serbian mediaeval rulers’ endowments.
The most significant mediaeval monasterial complexes were valorised in the 20th century
as the cultural properties of outstanding value and many of them are now on the World Cultural
and Natural Heritage List. In the historical process of valorisation, we notice that the focus was
always on the church, and only in the 20th century valid archaeological investigations of the
monasterial architecture started. In addition, the areas defined in that way were considered solely as
archaeological sites. But the monastery of Djurdjevi Stupovi was the one that saw a transformation
from the state of ruins to a live monasterial complex. There have been, and still are, numerous
discussions of how the religious heritage should be interpreted. Theoretical research of the
monasterial space conceptual sense confirms its complex triadological nature which bears a
multitude of both tangible and intangible cultural and historical significations.
Such a correlation of the said semiotic, intangible values and tangible traces constituted a
basis for a project of limited restoration of the north-west buildings in the Sopocani monasterial
complex. The general idea was to implement all the knowledge that had been gathered through
theoretical research of the religious area, and by protecting the entire architectural fabric, to make
manifest a clear relationship with the historical and the structural, but also the religious features of
the spatial complex.
Getting to know and understanding the spatial definition of the temple and the monasterial
unit, its essence and its life, its history and the state of it as a cultural/spiritual property, the sacred
attribute such an enclosure possesses, opens up a justifiable opportunity for a re-construction, a re-
creation of a certain way of life. Furthermore, it is supported by a limited restoration of the
monasterial buildings architecture, demonstrating that by repeating something really inimitable can
lead to unity based upon the indications of a specific topology of the past.