This study is aiming at the development of architectural workflow through better understanding of the role of adaptive principles in the conception and production of architectural models. Today the conceptual framework of “Adaptive Architecturež is employed to describe any built environment specifically designed to change according to the needs of its users and climatic conditions of the environment, and is often based on digital technology involving sensors, actuators and controllers. In respect to the approach which is oriented toward better performance of the built space and more efficient energy use, this study explores the role of adaptive principles in architectural design. Yet, this is done from a different point of view; one which precedes the use of innovative technologies in the building industry. The study will help to establish new design strategies and tools which enable and demand the use of novel technical solutions. The understanding of adaptive principles is not conditioned nor confined to the use of building technology which enables a physical transformation of space, while it does not exclude the ability of the built environment to change over time. The study investigates the role of adaptive phenomena, which are primarily related to the conception of complex spatial organisations, structures and environments. It implies adaptations throughout the design process rather than transformation of the built environment. There are two distinct segments of the research. The first one is theoretical, and based on logical argumentation. It provides an overview of the knowledge of three distinct but complimentary ways of modelling in architecture: analogue, performative and prototypical. The second segment is based on research by design which documents the process of conception and production of a series of prototypical models. This part of the study is experimental in nature and combines research with educational work. The backbone of the research is comprised of a series of design workshops with the participation of approximately eighty students from the Faculty of Architecture, University of Belgrade and the Visiting Programme of the Architectural Association, London, as well as several other schools of architecture. The departing point of the research by design is formed by two theoretical models, with different, yet connected III ways of suggesting the emergence of organisational patterns, which are not based on geometric and centrally controlled schemes, but on the internal and changing relations between their constitutive elements. The interpretation of both theoretical models, the “Fieldž (Allen, 1997) and the “Networkž (Wigley, 2001) has led to the research on how to design such complex and changing spatial organisations. It is postulated that adaptive principles may hold a key role for many design tools, enabling architects to comprehend and use such ideas. The result emerges as a strategy for the design of spatial organisations and structures characterised by the ability for continuous growth and the capacity of self-regulation in respect to the changing conditions of the environment.