The aim of the research conducted in this doctoral dissertation was to define methodology for developing a system for comprehensive environmental assessment of individual houses in the area of Belgrade. According to this, model for environmental assessment was initially formed as general. Three separate models for assessments of new, renewed and existing houses, based on characteristics of individual housing sector in Belgrade, were derived later. Model structure is consisted of categories, subcategories and criteria (the most precise items) of environmental assessment. Environmental impacts of individual houses were found as the most relevant factor for determination of categories (basic fields of environmental assessment). Characteristics of the area of Belgrade, existing domestic and international legislative and other sources, as well as internationally developed models, on the other side, all influenced the content of categories. All defined criteria were divided on prerequisites and voluntary measures which carry a certain number of ecological points. By summing the numbers of ecological points, first by criteria, then subcategories and finally categories, the total number of achieved ecological points is obtained. Minimum threshold below which the house cannot be defined as environmentally correct is set; above this threshold, according to the total number of the obtained ecological points, the house will be classified among three set levels of environmental quality. Maximum number of ecological points will be given to the house set in optimal position towards environment (with minimal flows towards nature and from it). Therefore, the ideal combination of applied measures relevant for the area of Belgrade and for the type of individual houses is determined. Defined model structure and methodology for assessment opened the road to the creation of electronic tool in EXCEL computer program by which the practical value has been given to the model. The tool was tested on examples of existing individual houses in Belgrade; it is confirmed that the model is functional and that the obtained results are correct. The structure of general model, from which three separate were later derived, was created in segments; from one side, this enabled simplified separation of variants, and from other, more important, integration of life cycle with criteria of environmental assessment. Determination of factors influencing the structure of model for environmental assessment, conducted in this doctoral dissertation on the example of individual houses, is significant for the creation of models for environmental assessment of other types of buildings and in other areas, which defines the direction of future researches in the field.