The use of electricity transmission lines for transmission of telecommunication signals dates back to the end of the 19th century. Given the disproportionate investment in conventional telecommunication technologies available, the idea of transmitting telecommunication signals, primarily for the purpose of managing automatic regulation in substations, has initiated the research and development of the Power Line Communication (PLC). Over the years, the frequency band assigned to the PLC communication in the CENELEC range (3 kHz to 148.5 kHz) has been standardized, and this narrowband two-way PLC communication has found its massive application in the field of remote reading of the electricity meter and consumption management. Therefore, PLC technology is used for the realization of communication services in the access level, or directly to the end user - the electricity consumers. In the meantime, a whole range of modern telecommunication technologies and services which telecommunication operators provide to their customers has been developed. At the same time, those users are also users of the electricity, which electricity distribution companies provide to them. So, electricity distribution companies and PLC equipment manufacturers have recognized their interest over the last 15 years by investing in the development of Broadband PLC communications, which involves the use of the frequency band from 1.6 MHz to 30 MHz, which enables the realization of higher data rates (theoretically up to 200 Mbps) to support broadband services such as VoIP, VoD, and high-speed Internet. By expanding their business in this direction, electricity distribution companies diversify their services and become more competitive in the liberalized electricity market. This paper presents an overview of the challenges and constraints that have been posed before the final commercialization of Broadband PLC Communication (BPL), as well as a proposal for technical solutions that can overcome these challenges and constraints. Also, the proposal of a concrete project and evaluation of indicators that would be the basis for verifying the applicability of BPL technology for the realization of the access telecommunication level and the provision of broadband services to end- users is presented. The paper is conceived in 10 chapters. After the first chapter as introductory, in which the subject of the research is described, the motivation for the selection of current topic, research goals, tasks, and the expected contribution from the research results, the next, second chapter deals with a detailed overview of the types of power lines that can be found in exploitation and their characteristics in terms of providing telecommunication services. Namely, there are different types of electric power conductors that are being implemented, both underground and above ground networks. Since low-voltage power lines are not primarily designed for transmission of telecommunication traffic, their design and technical characteristics themselves are not optimal for transmitting this kind of signal, each type of conductor, so its application in terms of the type of conductor, its length, branching, etc., represents unique model of BPL channel in some way, with its specific characteristics. The third section presents an overview of the PLC system elements and theoretical analysis of the characteristics and impacts of each of its elements on the performance of PLC communication. Considering that the topology of the electricity network significantly influences on the topology of the PLC network that is being implemented on electricity network infrastructure, the fourth chapter presents the classification of different topologies of low-voltage electricity distribution networks through the description of the organization of PLC access networks in terms of the methodology for selecting the optimal location for installing PLC base station, segmentation of the PLC access network, as well as the cases when it is necessary to use the regenerators of PLC signal and gateway in the PLC network. There is a significant number of different noise on the electricity network that affect PLC, or BPL communication. Fifth chapter categorizes and specifies the types of interference that occur in low voltage and medium voltage networks. Also, within this chapter, modulation techniques have been introduced which have found application in PLC systems, each with its advantages and disadvantages, with a proposal and description of OFDM modulation as optimal modulation for PLC communication. In addition to modulation techniques, it is necessary to observe the techniques of switching of telecommunication traffic within the PLC system, as well as to identify an efficient MAC protocol for application in the PLC access network. This is described in Chapter 6. Namely, each of the conventional MAC protocols has its advantages and disadvantages for reliable application in PLC systems, so a concept of hybrid MAC protocol that would be suitable for application in the PLC network and for implementation is proposed by considering possible scenarios of capacity allocation and access to the PLC access network on the side of communication nodes, as well as on the side of end-users. Each of the targeted broadband telecommunication services aimed to be provide to the users within an access broadband PLC network have their own requirements regarding the quality of the service to be provided in order to be competitive in relation to the conventional telecommunication technologies. The seventh chapter describes the types of multimedia content that are envisaged for transmission over the access broadband PLC network, as well as the quality requirements (QoS) for each of the multimedia content. The BPL communication has its own limitations, both, technical as mentioned in the previous chapters, as well as the regulatory ones. Namely, BPL communication interferes with other telecommunication systems using the same frequency spectrum, which is especially expressed in the case of overhead power lines that act as antennas and radiate the signal into the environment. Chapter 8 presents the regulatory aspect of the implementation of BPL technology and systems, globally, and through the regulatory framework in the Republic of Serbia. In the ninth chapter, a Project is proposed to identify indicators that would be the basis for verifying the applicability of BPL technology for the implementation of the access telecommunication level and the provision of broadband services to the end- users in the Republic of Serbia. The last, tenth chapter is a systematic conclusion. 