Accessible tourism, access tourism, barrier-free tourism, inclusive tourism are synonyms for tourism that is adjusted or accessible to all categories of consumers. At our domestic market it is a relatively new and underexplored concept, while its potential is well-known worldwide and due attention is paid to it through scientific studies and research as well as adjusting the tourism supply to the clients who use services in this area. Providing products and services in the environment that is adjusted to all users is certainly a great challenge for the whole tourism industry. Through following world trends in tourism and passing numerous laws and regulations i.e. adjusting the law and Strategies with EU legislation, these categories of clients are guaranteed equality in all social activities including the way they spend their leasure time. Accessibility has to be a part of every responsible and sustainable tourism policy and strategy and it requires effort at national level through investment in accessibility of all industries that comprise tourism industry. Being informed about regulations and adjusting regulations is not only necessary in order to support human rights, but it is a business opportunity as well. However, it is essential to change the way of thinking as well as the model of providing services. In this paper the emphasis is put on hotel services provided so as to meet the needs of the users of accessible tourism. Accessible environment and services add up to the improvement of hotel product quality thus raising the overall competitiveness of tourism destinations. The analysis of the research results shows the attitude towards accessible tourism held by the management of accessible hotels in Belgrade. The paper contains the analysis of their attitude towards the consumers of accessible tourism, the variety of the supply adjusted to them, HR policy and the intensity of promotion of accessible accommodation. The research has been conducted in order to determine the attitude of management towards the contribution that accessible tourism has on the success of their business. 