Nowadays, there are many swarm intelligence algorithms that are successfully used to solve various hard optimization problems. Common elements of all these algorithms are the operator for local search (exploitation) around the promising solutions that have been found and the global search (exploration) operator that helps to escape from local optima. Swarm intelligence algorithms are usually initially tested on unconstrained, constrained, or high-dimensional sets of standard test functions. Furthermore, they can be improved, adapted, modiﬁed, hybridized, combined with local search. The ultimate purpose is to use such metaheuristics to real-world optimization problems. The domains of solutions or search spaces for practical hard optimization problems can be diﬀerent. Solutions can be vectors of real or integers numbers, however they can also be more complex structures. Swarm intelligence algorithms have to be adapted for diﬀerent search spaces, which can be a simple adoptation of algorithm parameters or adaptation for integer solutions by simply rounding the obtained real solutions, but for some search spaces, the algorithm needs to be almost completely redesigned, including exploitation and exploration operators keeping only the guiding process or swarm intelligence. Several swarm intelligence algorithms and their adaptations for diﬀerent search spaces and application to practical problems are presented in this dissertation Goals of dissertation are to analyze and adapt swarm intelligence algorithms depending on the ﬁtness function and search space. The topic of this dissertation includes a comprehensive review of existing implementations of swarm intelligence algorithms. The dissertation also includes comparative analysis, presentation of weaknesses and strengths of some algorithms in relation to others together with research of adaptation of swarm intelligence algorithms for diﬀerent search spaces and their application to practical problems. Problems with real solutions such as support vector machine optimization, clustering, with integer solutions such as digital image segmentation problems and problems where solutions have a special structure such as robot path planning and minimum weight triangulation are considered. Modiﬁed and adapted swarm intelligence algorithms for diﬀerent search spaces and applied to practical problems were tested on standard test data sets and compared with other modern methods from the literature for solving the considered problems. Successful adaptations of swarm intelligence algorithms for various search spaces are shown. Such adapted algorithms achieved better results for all cases compared to the methods from the literature, which leads to the conclusion that it is possible to adapted swarm intelligence algorithms for various search spaces including complex structures and achieve better results compared to methods from the literature.