The subject of the doctoral dissertation Posthuman Gaze: Automated Images in Contemporary Cinema is the problematization of the concept of automated images as a means of expression in contemporary cinema, through the prism of the new modes of cinema in the age of digital media. In the era of omnipresent moving digital images, the source of the image is often unknown. Whether it's our computers' cameras, our gadget's lenses, or surveillance systems, images are generated automatically and algorithmically. The dissertation will examine how such seemingly random and autonomous images affect contemporary cinema. The term cinema will, therefore, be considered as the artistic media with the inherent transdisciplinarity. In this regard, the main aim of the dissertation is to examine how the postcinematic culture (when film production and reception technologies are subsumed under radically different power relations) reflects the relationship between the human subject and his societal, neoliberal, technocentric environment, closely related to the posthumanist context. The introduction presents the methodological foundation of the dissertation which consists of theoretical and empirical research that is constituted through the review and the analysis of the theoretical framework and is based on an interdisciplinary approach to the topic. The first chapter serves as the base for theoretical approaches for the concept of automated image. In the second chapter, the concept of automated image is contextu- alized within posthumanist studies, while the third chapter explains the terminological and structural basis for possible analysis of automated image as a film medium. The fourth, fifth and sixth chapters deal with specific case studies, i.e. analysis of automated images in contemporary cinema, through the reviews of surveillance camera films, com- puter screen films, and landscape films, as emerging genres and filmmaking tendencies. Selected case studies indicate that there is a common tendency to deconstruct the classical film narrative style by using atypical film means to bring the content closer to the currents of present-day screen culture, that requires the new understanding of contemporary scopic regimes. Therefore, the dissertation offers a critical apparatus for understanding the tendencies of contemporary digital cinema as the implication of posthumanist discourse.  