This paper gives an overview of relevant sources from traditional and contemporary literature in the field of Communication, Organizational science, Values (social psychology) and Management of Change. The literature review has been followed by a critical overview of the shortcomings of individual research, the analysis of content and the comparison of mutually similar surveys conducted on specific respondents. After a detailed presentation and analysis of the content, the results of the research conducted for the purpose of this dissertation, on a suitable sample, on the territory of several countries, in order to make the results more relevant and purposeful, have been presented. The sample of respondents who participated in this survey consisted of 342 employees. Out of these, 200 respondents filled in an online survey from 5 countries in the region and 10 countries of the western hemisphere, while the questionnaire came to remaining respondents through personal contacts. The results of the field research were compared with the published research, which are known in domestic and foreign literature so far, and the analysis of similarities and differences has been made. The paper attempts to prove whether there are indicators that are statistically derived, which show the correlation between the external communication of the organization (that is, the communication of the organization with its public) and the socio-personal values of the employees in it. Factor analysis of the sample showed that there are six indicators of external communication of the organization. As correlations and other statistical methods proved that there is a correlation between the indicators of the external communication of the organization and socio-personal values of its employees, the main Hypothesis of this research, which reads as follows: There are statistically obtained indicators that indicate the correlation between the organization's external communication with the socio-personal values of its employees, has been proven. In modern research, and especially in domestic literature, there is not enough systematized elaboration of external communication as a kind of organizational behavior. First of all, there are no research that involves external communication of the organization in relation to the values, desires, needs, motivation and corporate identity of the employees working in it. External communication of an organization deserves the attention of the researchers because of its specificity in our social frameworks, where it is most often performed impulsively, and with the current budget, instead of being strategically planned. It is often left to a non-systematic approach that depends on the certain department within the company and some employees who are mainly engaged in marketing activities and issuing press releases. Also, the research found that there is a correlation between the (non) successful external communication of the organization with the motivation of the employees to work, and that the connection is of a positive sign, that is, if the organization has more efficient and successful external communication, its employees are more motivated to work in it. On the other hand, the attitudes of employees towards changes in organizations that want to advance, which are often inevitable, suggest that there is a significant difference in the value priorities among those employees who accept changes and who are willing to participate in them from those who provide resistance to change. Such results already exist in previous research, which various authors explain as "internal motivation", that is, the employees who are less afraid of changes and have a more positive attitude about them, are more easily self-motivated and even become active participants in change process themselves, and often also the bearers of the organizational changes. Most often, they are employees with a value system that involves high appreciation of family values, personal happiness, employees with a high degree of education, with a pronounced need for financial independence and independence in general as well as commitment to work. Due to all this, given the fact that the dissertation has given new scientific information, the discussion and final conclusions give a proposal on how to better implement the results of this research in organizational systems and their channels of both internal and external communication. 