Tourism development in cities represents important research topics in the last few decades. The interest of researchers in the sphere of tourismstems from the efforts to point out the importance of cities as tourist destinations with a pronounced multifunctionality of space and resources. City tourism is one of the innovative ways to utilize the existing resource structure to create a new tourist product, which will enable cities to have a better competitive position on the tourism market. The comparative advantages of city tourism are reflected in the ability of cities to provide the appropriate experience and experience for tourists of different demographic profiles and multiple travel motives. In addition, in comparison to other types of tourist destinations, the influence of seasonality is significantly less pronounced in cities, which points to the year-round and uniform influx of tourists. Modern tourist trends indicate the growing interest of tourists for shorter and more frequent vacations during the year, which are realized in towns in the form of city break trips. Such a tendency contributes to the growing attractiveness of cities as tourist destinations, which is further reflected in the realization of the goals of a large number of tourist offerers. The subject of the research, which is the key topic of this doctoral dissertation, is the development of city tourism in the Republic of Serbia. In order to provide an objective and analytical approach to the subject of the research, a detailed analysis of the existing tourist offer of the key promoters of the development of city tourism in Serbia has been carried out. The paper presents the results of empirical research carried out on the side of tourist offer and on the side of tourist demand in order to examine attitudes of relevant stakeholders and to draw conclusions about the current state of city tourism and provide guidelines for improving its development. The research of the attitudes of tourists was carried out in order to gain insight into the achieved quality of the tourist offer of the cities of the Republic of Serbia. The study of key promoters of tourism development in cities and employees in relevant state institutions was carried out in order to analyze their views on the importance of certain resources for the development of city tourism as well as key development problems and ways to achieve a better competitive position of the cities of the Republic of Serbia in the tourism market. The goal of the doctoral dissertation is to provide an answer to the question of how to improve the development of tourism in the cities of the Republic of Serbia, apart from the objective consideration of the achieved level of development of city tourism.