With globalization of international operation, intellectual capital management becomes more and more important as well. Nowadays, belief that the effective management of intellectual capital is a key to the success of organizations is prevailing. Intellectual capital becomes a key resource and a base of operations of a modern organization. In the early twenties of the last century, the concept of intellectual capital gained in importance. By studying this concept the market value of the organization is growing significantly in comparison to its book value. Unlike tangible assets whose value decreases by usage over time, proper use of intellectual capital increases the value of the organization. The management is expected that in the conditions of drastic changes in the environment tries to identify and use opportunities and strengths, and minimize or eliminate the weaknesses. Only in such a way, there comes the growth and development of the organization. Intellectual capital has the operational and strategic significance for the organization. Today, organizations are showing more and more interest in intellectual capital management. Intellectual capital as a type of intangible assets comprises of human capital, structural and relational capital. The intellectual capital does not involve only the knowledge available in the organization, but also the competences of the staff, as well as organizational structure, business processes, intellectual property, corporate culture. Resources, both internal and external resources (relations with customers, suppliers, distributors, and other stakeholders) are also very important. Intellectual capital includes those factors that are not included in the official financial statements, but are important for the creation of organizational values. Proper use of intellectual capital increases the value of the organization. Qualitative dimension is more important for it, in relation to the quantitative that will create added value. Intellectual capital is a signpost to the future in terms of dynamic changes in the environment. The aim of the thesis is to examine how organizations identify intellectual capital, evaluate it and report it. The thesis includes a review of relevant literature in the field of intellectual capital and a review of previous studies related to the practice of intellectual capital management in organizations. Empirical research conducted within the thesis talks about the notion of intellectual capital in the organizations in the Republic of Serbia and the grading of its importance for financial reporting. The study confirmed the hypothesis of the thesis on providing adequate intellectual capital position as one of the leading performance in the modern age, with the aim of ensuring the completeness of the information. The final conclusion is reflected in the necessity of valuation of intellectual capital and its presentation in an additional financial statement, in order to show the value of the organization in as reliable and accurate manner as possible. The adopted set of financial statements and quantitative indicators do not have sufficiently precise scope for presentation of necessary information, so quantified non-financial elements, or in the descriptive form, can contribute to a clearer picture of the value and potentials of the entire organization.