The objective of the doctoral thesis is to indicate and explain how the system of business intelligence could be upgraded by the means of group decision making process. The term intelligence in the context of business intelligence originally denotes reporting or information envisaged to support business decision making. Conceived in this way, business intelligence facilitates orientation in new situations and contributes to accelerated and accurate problem solutions; however, it differs from the prevailing, psychological meaning of the term in the sense that here it does not relate to a personal capacity that an individual can make use of, but to a technological solution applied by a company. Business intelligence shall be regarded neither as a product nor a system. Actually it is an architecture and collection of integrated operative applications and decision supporting applications. Business intelligence represents the usage of all data potentials, consequently the corporate information and knowledge aimed at making better and appropriate business decisions, and therefrom the ability to identify new business opportunities. The support to an individual decision maker is an activity of utmost importance for any successful corporate management. However, since business system operations and functioning gradually gain in complexity and therefore the responsibility for decisions taken becomes ever larger, there is a necessity to take account of all various ideas and attitudes shared by team members, namely the prepared quantum of knowledge, all for the purpose of group decision making. Moreover, it is a mathematically proved fact that the sum of knowledge of all team members by definition always exceeds the knowledge of any team member. The only prerequisite here is the existent communication and share of resources among team members. On the other hand, the need for quality improvement concerning group decision making is evident. This represents an ongoing topic of interest for researchers with considerable practical and theoretical knowledge. Therefore, the issues of knowledge acquisition, storage and distribution will be dedicated special attention and treatment; knowledge will underlay all chapters of the thesis and will make the connective tissue of the paper.