Doctoral dissertation "Planning of marketing communication strategy in cultural-educational institutions for children'' contains a systematization of theoretical knowledge, created on the basis of previous studies of marketing communication strategies in culture and cultural and educational institutions for children, practical knowledge acquired during many years of work in the cultural institution for children founded by City of Belgrade, as well as numerous cultural projects for children and youth. The goal of this research is equality in treating of cultural- educational institutions for children with other cultural institutions which are intended for older population, given that there is no literature that comprehensively treats this problem. The problem that this dissertation treats is the lack of awareness of the market thinking in cultural institutions for children, which directly threatens the survival of the institution and its future development. For this study, interviews, focus groups, surveys and case studies were used; also, public and private institutions and organizations for children were analyzed, from Serbia and the region, with regard to other similar institutions outside the region. Paper analyzes the problem of implementation of marketing communication strategies and public relations, and shows how institutions for children plan and implement marketing communication strategies. The paper presents positive examples from practice for a comprehensive comparison. The paper analyzes the specificity of marketing communication in the field of culture and education, as well as the correlation between the non-profit marketing and public relations, which must exist in non-profit cultural and educational activities. Cultural institutions for children must gain a competitive position, must retain existing customers and must win potential audience, but also need to awake the cultural need with the so-called non-existent audience. The obstacle to development of cultural-educational institutions is the lack of a sufficient number of audiences. Using integrated marketing communications and public relations, cultural and educational institutions for children can, in cooperation with schools, create children cultural needs, create cultural habits and the form healthier adulthood. Theoretical and empirical research confirm the basic hypothesis of this paper: successful positioning of cultural and educational institutions for children in the market needs continuously implementation of marketing communication strategies. It has been established that marketing is necessity in the sphere of culture and education, in its broadest sense. Although there is a significant difference between profit and non-profit sector, there are basic marketing concepts that can be applied to one and to another sector, such as the provision of services/products that the user/costumer demands and mutually beneficial exchange.