The main topic of the doctoral dissertation belongs to the field of information society, its development and mechanisms for tracking and measuring its advancements. This dissertation summarizes the existing research and theories developed on the topic of information society, its evolution and variety of forms, factors that determine its growth and various international initiatives aimed at guiding the global progress of information society. By investigating the possibilities to quantify the information society as a complex concept defined by the set of mutually correlated indicators, this dissertation research the most convenient metrics that would enable observing, measuring and evaluating the actual condition of information society. In addition to providing the classification and the evolution path of the benchmarking indicators that represent the cornerstone of every methodology aimed at quantifying the information society, this dissertation contains the overview of the most relevant methodologies used for evaluating the information society worldwide. However, the main focus of this work represents the design of the original model which specifies actions required to track and evaluate the advancements in the information society of Serbia. This model assumes: • theoretical foundation, • compatibility with the European Union (EU) standards, which enables its broad use in the projects with international cross-country analyses and comparisons, • compliance with the particularities of Serbian information society and the existing possibilities of Serbia for investment and further development. Formulation of the model has encompassed: • selection of the set of Information Society Indicators (ISI) in accordance with EU standards, but with modification with regards to characteristics and development possibilities of Serbia, • transformation of the ISI set that enables their ranking according to the significance for monitoring of the information society, • extracting a subset of the most relevant ISI, • Defining the sub-model that quantifies the degree of digital divide through an unique compound indicator - Digital Polarization Index (DPI). The formulated model has been verified on the case of Serbia, through monitoring and analysis of its information society over the 5-year period. The verification process has consisted of: • statistical monitoring, quantification and relevant data analysis, and • analysis of the results with respect to determining the current state, discovering and quantifying of ‘critical points’ in the development of the information society in Serbia, as well as forecasting its future progress. Professional contribution of the dissertation is the evaluation of the information society development in Serbia, both from the perspective of the population and the economy. Furthermore, dissertation contributes by providing quantification and evaluation of the intensity of digital divide and its trends, as well as targeting ‘digitally’ most underdeveloped groups within the population in Serbia. Basic scientific contribution has been achieved through the formulation of the model for monitoring and evaluation of the information society development. This model is based on the I-distance method and cluster analysis, as two adequately combined methods of multivariate analysis. The initial set of indicators has been reduced to the subset of the most relevant ones, after ranking according to their I-distance value and the application of the cluster analysis. The obtained subset encompasses the most significant indicators, according to the ‘information quantity’ for the information society assessment. By reducing the number of indicators, while preserving the valuable information content, the applicability of this model in practice has been greatly increased. In addition, the dissertation defines the model for quantification of individual and total digital divide in different areas, by introducing the digital polarization index. Main features of this model are its generality, flexibility and openness for adding or changing its basic components. This allows possibility for identification, definition and calculation of the various individual sub-indices of digital polarization, used in calculating the total DPI (expressed by arbitrarily selected sets of indicators and arbitrarily determined subgroups of the sample). Such features of the model are valuable in terms of its applicability in conditions of the high pace of changes in the ICT area. Social contribution of the dissertation is the vast potentials of application of its results in the field of monitoring and quantifying the information society, as well as in the process of guiding and harmonizing its development. The formulated model can be used as a strategic decision support tool, also as a tool for observing and minimizing the digital divide. Furthermore, it can be used to support the evaluation of the different complex social phenomenon, which are outside the information society framework.